 Tarski was born on January 14, 1901 in Warsaw, then a part of the Russian Empire. His family name at birth was Tajtelbaum, changed to Tarski in 1923. He studied mathematics and philosophy at the University of Warsaw from 1918 to 1924, taking courses with Kotarbiński, Leśniewski, Łukasiewicz, Mazurkiewicz and Sierpiński among others. (See Lvov-Warsaw School.) He got a doctoral degree, under Leśniewski’s supervision, in 1924. From then until 1939 he taught mathematics at a high school and held minor teaching positions at the University of Warsaw. In this period he published prolifically on logic and set theory, building a strong international reputation for himself.  Yet he failed in his attempt to obtain a professorship at the University of Lvov (now Lviv) in 1939. In 1929 he married Maria Witkowska, with whom he soon had two children, Ina and Jan. In August 1939 Tarski traveled to the United States to attend a congress of the Unity of Science movement (see Vienna Circle). World War II broke out soon after that, leaving Tarski no option but to stay in the States. He spent the war years separated from his family, forced to remain in Poland. In this period he held several temporary university positions, at Harvard University, the City College of New York, the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, and the University of California at Berkeley, where he was eventually given tenure in 1945 and a professorship in mathematics in 1948. Maria, Ina and Jan were able to join him in Berkeley in 1946. In Berkeley Tarski built a prominent school of research in logic and the foundations of mathematics and science, centered around the prestigious graduate program in logic and methodology of science, which he was also instrumental in creating. He received many academic honors, such as the membership in the National Academy of Sciences of the USA and the election as Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. Tarski remained affiliated to Berkeley until his death, on October 27, 1983.