 Aristotle’s most famous achievement as logician is his theory of inference, traditionally called the syllogistic (though not by Aristotle). That theory is in fact the theory of inferences of a very specific sort: inferences with two premises, each of which is a categorical sentence, having exactly one term in common, and having as conclusion a categorical sentence the terms of which are just those two terms not shared by the premises. Aristotle calls the term shared by the premises the middle term (meson) and each of the other two terms in the premises an extreme (akron). The middle term must be either subject or predicate of each premise, and this can occur in three ways: the middle term can be the subject of one premise and the predicate of the other, the predicate of both premises, or the subject of both premises. Aristotle refers to these term arrangements as figures (schêmata): Aristotle calls the term which is the predicate of the conclusion the major term and the term which is the subject of the conclusion the minor term. The premise containing the major term is the major premise, and the premise containing the minor term is the minor premise. Aristotle then systematically investigates all possible combinations of two premises in each of the three figures. For each combination, he either demonstrates that some conclusion necessarily follows or demonstrates that no conclusion follows. The results he states are correct. Aristotle’s proofs can be divided into two categories, based on a distinction he makes between “perfect” or “complete” (teleios) deductions and “imperfect” or “incomplete” (atelês) deductions. A deduction is perfect if it “needs no external term in order to show the necessary result” (24b23–24), and it is imperfect if it “needs one or several in addition that are necessary because of the terms supposed but were not assumed through premises” (24b24–25). The precise interpretation of this distinction is debatable, but it is at any rate clear that Aristotle regards the perfect deductions as not in need of proof in some sense. For imperfect deductions, Aristotle does give proofs, which invariably depend on the perfect deductions. Thus, with some reservations, we might compare the perfect deductions to the axioms or primitive rules of a deductive system. In the proofs for imperfect deductions, Aristotle says that he “reduces” (anagein) each case to one of the perfect forms and that they are thereby “completed” or “perfected”. These completions are either probative (deiktikos: a modern translation might be “direct”) or through the impossible (dia to adunaton). A direct deduction is a series of steps leading from the premises to the conclusion, each of which is either a conversion of a previous step or an inference from two previous steps relying on a first-figure deduction. Conversion, in turn, is inferring from a proposition another which has the subject and predicate interchanged. Specifically, Aristotle argues that three such conversions are sound: He undertakes to justify these in An. Pr. I.2. From a modern standpoint, the third is sometimes regarded with suspicion. Using it we can get Some monsters are chimeras from the apparently true All chimeras are monsters; but the former is often construed as implying in turn There is something which is a monster and a chimera, and thus that there are monsters and there are chimeras. In fact, this simply points up something about Aristotle’s system: Aristotle in effect supposes that all terms in syllogisms are non-empty. (For further discussion of this point, see the entry on the  square of opposition). As an example of the procedure, we may take Aristotle’s proof of Camestres. He says: From this text, we can extract an exact formal proof, as follows: A completion or proof “through the impossible” shows that a certain conclusion follows from a pair of premises by assuming as a third premise the denial of that conclusion and giving a deduction, from it and one of the original premises, the denial (or the contrary) of the other premises. This is the deduction of an “impossible”, and Aristotle’s proof ends at that point. An example is his proof of Baroco in 27a36–b1: Aristotle proves invalidity by constructing counterexamples. This is very much in the spirit of modern logical theory: all that it takes to show that a certain form is invalid is a single instance of that form with true premises and a false conclusion. However, Aristotle states his results not by saying that certain premise-conclusion combinations are invalid but by saying that certain premise pairs do not “syllogize”: that is, that, given the pair in question, examples can be constructed in which premises of that form are true and a conclusion of any of the four possible forms is false. When possible, he does this by a clever and economical method: he gives two triplets of terms, one of which makes the premises true and a universal affirmative “conclusion” true, and the other of which makes the premises true and a universal negative “conclusion” true. The first is a counterexample for an argument with either an \(E\) or an \(O\) conclusion, and the second is a counterexample for an argument with either an \(A\) or an \(I\) conclusion. In Prior Analytics I.4–6, Aristotle shows that the premise combinations given in the following table yield deductions and that all other premise combinations fail to yield a deduction. In the terminology traditional since the middle ages, each of these combinations is known as a mood Latin modus, “way”, which in turn is a translation of Greek tropos). Aristotle, however, does not use this expression and instead refers to “the arguments in the figures”. In this table, “\(\vdash\)” separates premises from conclusion; it may be read “therefore”. The second column lists the medieval mnemonic name associated with the inference (these are still widely used, and each is actually a mnemonic for Aristotle’s proof of the mood in question). The third column briefly summarizes Aristotle’s procedure for demonstrating the deduction. Table of the Deductions in the Figures Having established which deductions in the figures are possible, Aristotle draws a number of metatheoretical conclusions, including: He also proves the following metatheorem: His proof of this is elegant. First, he shows that the two particular deductions of the first figure can be reduced, by proof through impossibility, to the universal deductions in the second figure: He then observes that since he has already shown how to reduce all the particular deductions in the other figures except Baroco and Bocardo to Darii and Ferio, these deductions can thus be reduced to Barbara and Celarent. This proof is strikingly similar both in structure and in subject to modern proofs of the redundancy of axioms in a system. Many more metatheoretical results, some of them quite sophisticated, are proved in Prior Analytics I.45 and in Prior Analytics II. As noted below, some of Aristotle’s metatheoretical results are appealed to in the epistemological arguments of the Posterior Analytics. Aristotle follows his treatment of “arguments in the figures” with a much longer, and much more problematic, discussion of what happens to these figured arguments when we add the qualifications “necessarily” and “possibly” to their premises in various ways. In contrast to the syllogistic itself (or, as commentators like to call it, the assertoric syllogistic), this modal syllogistic appears to be much less satisfactory and is certainly far more difficult to interpret. Here, I only outline Aristotle’s treatment of this subject and note some of the principal points of interpretive controversy. Modern modal logic treats necessity and possibility as interdefinable: “necessarily P” is equivalent to “not possibly not P”, and “possibly P” to “not necessarily not P”. Aristotle gives these same equivalences in On Interpretation. However, in Prior Analytics, he makes a distinction between two notions of possibility. On the first, which he takes as his preferred notion, “possibly P” is equivalent to “not necessarily P and not necessarily not P”. He then acknowledges an alternative definition of possibility according to the modern equivalence, but this plays only a secondary role in his system. Aristotle builds his treatment of modal syllogisms on his account of non-modal (assertoric) syllogisms: he works his way through the syllogisms he has already proved and considers the consequences of adding a modal qualification to one or both premises. Most often, then, the questions he explores have the form: “Here is an assertoric syllogism; if I add these modal qualifications to the premises, then what modally qualified form of the conclusion (if any) follows?”. A premise can have one of three modalities: it can be necessary, possible, or assertoric. Aristotle works through the combinations of these in order: Though he generally considers only premise combinations which syllogize in their assertoric forms, he does sometimes extend this; similarly, he sometimes considers conclusions in addition to those which would follow from purely assertoric premises. Since this is his procedure, it is convenient to describe modal syllogisms in terms of the corresponding non-modal syllogism plus a triplet of letters indicating the modalities of premises and conclusion: \(N\) = “necessary”, \(P\) = “possible”, \(A\) = “assertoric”. Thus, “Barbara \(NAN\)” would mean “The form Barbara with necessary major premise, assertoric minor premise, and necessary conclusion”. I use the letters “\(N\)” and “\(P\)” as prefixes for premises as well; a premise with no prefix is assertoric. Thus, Barbara \(NAN\) would be \(NAab, Abc \vdash NAac\). As in the case of assertoric syllogisms, Aristotle makes use of conversion rules to prove validity. The conversion rules for necessary premises are exactly analogous to those for assertoric premises: Possible premises behave differently, however. Since he defines “possible” as “neither necessary nor impossible”, it turns out that \(x\) is possibly \(F\) entails, and is entailed by, \(x\) is possibly not \(F\). Aristotle generalizes this to the case of categorical sentences as follows: In addition, Aristotle uses the intermodal principle \(N\rightarrow A\): that is, a necessary premise entails the corresponding assertoric one. However, because of his definition of possibility, the principle \(A\rightarrow P\) does not generally hold: if it did, then \(N\rightarrow P\) would hold, but on his definition “necessarily \(P\)” and “possibly \(P\)” are actually inconsistent (“possibly \(P\)” entails “possibly not \(P\)”). This leads to a further complication. The denial of “possibly \(P\)” for Aristotle is “either necessarily \(P\) or necessarily not \(P\)”. The denial of “necessarily \(P\)” is still more difficult to express in terms of a combination of modalities: “either possibly \(P\) (and thus possibly not \(P\)) or necessarily not \(P\)” This is important because of Aristotle’s proof procedures, which include proof through impossibility. If we give a proof through impossibility in which we assume a necessary premise, then the conclusion we ultimately establish is simply the denial of that necessary premise, not a “possible” conclusion in Aristotle’s sense. Such propositions do occur in his system, but only in exactly this way, i.e., as conclusions established by proof through impossiblity from necessary assumptions. Somewhat confusingly, Aristotle calls such propositions “possible” but immediately adds “ not in the sense defined”: in this sense, “possibly \(Oab\)” is simply the denial of “necessarily \(Aab\)”. Such propositions appear only as premises, never as conclusions. Aristotle holds that an assertoric syllogism remains valid if “necessarily” is added to its premises and its conclusion: the modal pattern \(NNN\) is always valid. He does not treat this as a trivial consequence but instead offers proofs; in all but two cases, these are parallel to those offered for the assertoric case. The exceptions are Baroco and Bocardo, which he proved in the assertoric case through impossibility: attempting to use that method here would require him to take the denial of a necessary \(O\) proposition as hypothesis, raising the complication noted above, and he uses the procedure he calls ecthesis instead (see Smith 1982). Since a necessary premise entails an assertoric premise, every \(AN\) or \(NA\) combination of premises will entail the corresponding \(AA\) pair, and thus the corresponding \(A\) conclusion. Thus, \(ANA\) and \(NAA\) syllogisms are always valid. However, Aristotle holds that some, but not all, \(ANN\) and \(NAN\) combinations are valid. Specifically, he accepts Barbara \(NAN\) but rejects Barbara \(ANN\). Almost from Aristotle’s own time, interpreters have found his reasons for this distinction obscure, or unpersuasive, or both, and often have not followed his view. His close associated Theophrastus, for instance, adopted the simpler rule that the modality of the conclusion of a syllogism was always the “weakest” modality found in either premise, where \(N\) is stronger than \(A\) and \(A\) is stronger than \(P\) (and where \(P\) probably has to be defined as “not necessarily not”). Beginning with Albrecht Becker, interpreters using the methods of modern formal logic to interpret Aristotle’s modal logic have seen the Two-Barbaras problem as only one of a series of difficulties in giving a coherent interpretation of the modal syllogistic. A very wide range of reconstructions has been proposed: see Becker 1933, McCall 1963, Nortmann 1996, Van Rijen 1989, Patterson 1995, Thomason 1993, Thom 1996, Rini 2012, Malink 2013. The majority of reconstructions do not attempt to reproduce every detail of Aristotle’s exposition but instead produce modified reconstructions that abandon some of those results. Malink 2013, however, offers a reconstruction that reproduces everything Aristotle says, although the resulting model introduces a high degree of complexity. (This subject quickly becomes too complex for summarizing in this brief article.