 Carl G(ustav) Hempel (1905–97), known as “Peter” to his friends, was born near Berlin, Germany, on January 8, 1905. He studied philosophy, physics and mathematics at the Universities of Göttingen and Heidelberg before coming to the University of Berlin in 1925, where he studied with Hans Reichenbach. Impressed by the work of David Hilbert and Paul Bernays on the foundations of mathematics and introduced to the studies of Rudolf Carnap by Reichenbach, Hempel came to believe that the application of symbolic logic held the key to resolving a broad range of problems in philosophy, including that of separating genuine problems from merely apparent ones. Hempel’s commitment to rigorous explications of the nature of cognitive significance, of scientific explanation, and of scientific rationality would become the hallmark of his research, which exerted great influence on professional philosophers, especially during the middle decades of the 20th Century. In 1929, at Reichenbach’s suggestion, Hempel spent the fall semester at the University of Vienna, where he studied with Carnap, Moritz Schlick, and Frederick Waismann, who were advocates of logical positivism and members of (what came to be known as) “the Vienna Circle”. It would fall to Hempel to become perhaps the most astute critic of that movement and to contribute to its refinement as logical empiricism. As Hitler increased his power in Germany, Hempel, who was not Jewish but did not support the Nazi regime, moved to Brussels and began collaborating with Paul Oppenheim, which would result in several classic papers, including “Studies in the Logic of Explanation”, which appeared in 1948 (Rescher 2005: Chs. 8 and 9). Hempel would also visit the United States twice—the University of Chicago in 1937–38 and then the City College of New York in 1939–40, where he held his first academic position—and eventually became a naturalized citizen. He was productive throughout his career, publishing such important papers as “The Function of General Laws in History” (1942) and “Studies in the Logic of Confirmation”, “Geometry and Empirical Science”, and “The Nature of Mathematical Truth” (all in 1945), before leaving City College for Yale. While there, Hempel would publish “Problems and Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of Meaning” (1950) and “The Concept of Cognitive Significance: A Reconsideration” (1951), as well as his first book, a volume in the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Fundamentals of Concept Formation in Empirical Science (1952). Hempel moved to Princeton in 1955, where his research program flourished and his influence upon professional philosophers became immense. During his two decades at Princeton, Hempel’s approach dominated the philosophy of science. His major articles during this interval included “The Theoretician’s Dilemma” (1958), “Inductive Inconsistencies” (1960), “Rational Action” (1961), and “Deductive-Nomological vs. Statistical Explanation” and “Explanation in Science and in History” and  (both in 1962). A classic collection of his studies, Aspects of Scientific Explanation (1965c), became a scholar’s bible for generations of graduate students. His introductory text, Philosophy of Natural Science (1966a), would be translated into ten languages. Other articles he published thereafter included “Recent Problems of Induction” (1966b) and “Maximal Specificity and Lawlikeness in Probabilistic Explanation” (1968) as well as a series of studies that included “On the ‘Standard Conception’ of Scientific Theories” (1970). At the University of Pittsburgh following his mandatory retirement from Princeton in 1973, he continued to publish significant articles, including studies of the nature of scientific rationality, “Scientific Rationality: Analytic vs. Pragmatic Perspectives” (1979), and “Turns in the Evolution of the Problem of Induction” (1981), and on the structure of scientific theories, including, most importantly, “Limits of a Deductive Construal of the Function of Scientific Theories” (1988a) as well as “Provisos: A Problem Concerning the Inferential Function of Scientific Theories” (1988b), further enhancing his reputation by his willingness to reconsider earlier positions. After his death in 1997, new collections of his papers appeared (Jeffrey 2000; Fetzer 2001), which complemented studies of his research (Rescher 1969; Esler et al. 1985; Kitcher & Salmon 1989; Fetzer 2000b).