 The need to dismantle the verifiability criterion of meaningfulness together with the demise of the observational/theoretical distinction meant that logical positivism no longer represented a rationally defensible position. At least two of its defining tenets had been shown to be without merit. Since most philosophers believed that Quine had shown the analytic/synthetic distinction was also untenable, moreover, many concluded that the enterprise had been a total failure. Among the important benefits of Hempel’s critique, however, was the production of more general and flexible criteria of cognitive significance in Hempel (1965b), included in a famous collection of his studies, Aspects of Scientific Explanation (1965d). There he proposed that cognitive significance could not be adequately captured by means of principles of verification or falsification, whose defects were parallel, but instead required a far more subtle and nuanced approach. Hempel suggested multiple criteria for assessing the cognitive significance of different theoretical systems, where significance is not categorical but rather a matter of degree: The criteria Hempel offered for evaluating the “degrees of significance” of theoretical systems (as conjunctions of hypotheses, definitions, and auxiliary claims) were (a) the clarity and precision with which they are formulated, including explicit connections to observational language; (b) the systematic—explanatory and predictive—power of such a system, in relation to observable phenomena; (c) the formal simplicity of the systems with which a certain degree of systematic power is attained; and (d) the extent to which those systems have been confirmed by experimental evidence (Hempel 1965b). The elegance of Hempel’s study laid to rest any lingering aspirations for simple criteria of cognitive significance and signaled the demise of logical positivism as a philosophical movement. Precisely what remained, however, was in doubt. Presumably, anyone who rejected one or more of the three principles defining positivism—the analytic/synthetic distinction, the observational/theoretical distinction, and the verifiability criterion of significance—was not a logical positivist. The precise outlines of its philosophical successor, which would be known as “logical empiricism”, were not entirely evident. Perhaps this study came the closest to defining its intellectual core. Those who accepted Hempel’s four criteria and viewed cognitive significance as a matter of degree were members, at least in spirit. But some new problems were beginning to surface with respect to Hempel’s covering-law explication of explanation and old problems remained from his studies of induction, the most remarkable of which was known as “the paradox of confirmation”. Hempel’s most controversial argument appeared in an article about induction entitled “Studies in the Logic of Confirmation” (1945a), where he evaluates the conditions under which an empirical generalization would be confirmed or disconfirmed by instances or non-instances of its antecedent and consequent. He focused on universally quantified material conditionals, exemplified by sentences of the form, “\((x)(Rx \supset Bx)\)”. With “\(Rx\)” interpreted as “\(x\) is a raven” and “\(Bx\)” as “\(x\) is black”, this schema represents, in first-order symbolic logic, the claim, “All ravens are black”. He also considered sentences of more complex logical structures, but nothing hinges upon their use that cannot be addressed relative to an example of the simplest possible kind. And, indeed, Hempel took sentences of this kind as exemplars of “lawlike sentences”, which combine purely universal form with what he called purely qualitative predicates. So lawlike sentences that are true as extensional generalizations are “laws” (Hempel & Oppenheim 1948). Hempel applied “Nicod’s criterion” to this example, where Nicod had proposed that, in relation to conditional hypotheses, instances of their antecedents that are also instances of their consequents confirm them; instances of their antecedents that are not instances of their consequents disconfirm them; and non-instantiations of their antecedents are neutral, neither confirming nor disconfirming. Applied to the raven hypothesis, this means that, given a thing named “\(c\)”, the truth of “\(Rc\)” and “\(Bc\)” confirms it; the truth of “\(Rc\)” and “\(\neg Bc\)” disconfirms it; and the truth of “\(\neg Rc\)” neither confirms nor disconfirms it, but remains evidentially neutral, regardless of the truth value of “\(Bc\)”. To these highly intuitive conditions, Hempel added that, since logically equivalent hypotheses have the same empirical content, whatever confirms one member of a set of logically equivalent hypotheses must also confirm the others, which he called “the equivalence condition”. No matter how intuitive, Hempel proceeded to demonstrate that this creates a paradox. By Nicod’s criterion, “\((x)(Rx \supset Bx)\)” is confirmed by ravens that are black. But, by that same standard, “\((x)(\neg Bx \supset \neg Rx)\)” is confirmed by non-black non-ravens, such as white shoes! Since these are logically equivalent and have the same empirical content, they must be confirmed or disconfirmed by all and only the same instances. This means that—no matter how counter-intuitive—the lawlike hypothesis, “All ravens are black”, is confirmed by observations of white shoes! Since these hypotheses are also equivalent to “\((x)(\neg Rx \vee Bx)\)”, which asserts that everything either is not a raven or is black, it is also the case that observations of non-ravens confirms the hypothesis, regardless of their color. Observations of non-ravens, however, unlike those of black ravens, confirm alternative hypotheses, like “All ravens are blue” and “All ravens are green”. Hempel’s point was that the application of Nicod’s criterion means that, since even observations of non-ravens are confirmatory, the class of neutral instances in fact has no members. Few papers in the philosophy of science have produced such a voluminous literature. In a “Postscript”, Hempel addressed a few of the suggestions that have been advanced to analyze the paradoxical quality of the argument (Hempel 1965a). Several were intent upon explaining them quantitatively on the ground that, for example, there are many more non-black things than black things or that the probability of being non-black is much great than the probability of being a raven, whereas others appealed to Bayesian principles and suggested that the prior probability for ravens being black makes testing non-ravens of considerably less relative risk. Hempel replied that even the existence of a quantitative measure of evidential support poses no challenge to his conclusion that the paradoxical cases—non-black non-ravens, such as white shoes—are confirmatory. Hempel acknowledges that an explanation for why the paradoxical cases appear to be non-confirmatory may have something to do with fashioning hypotheses about classes that are affected by their relative size. Since the class of non-ravens is so much larger than the class of ravens, where what we are interested in, by hypothesis, is the color of ravens, instances of non-black non-ravens might count as confirmatory but to a lesser degree than instances of black ravens. He allows the possibility that perhaps the theory of confirmation should proceed quantitatively, which might provide a less perplexing basis for assessments of this kind. But he steadfastly maintains that the consequences he identified following from the application of the principles he employed are logically impeccable, no matter how psychologically surprising they may seem (Hempel 1960). The most important claim of Hempel (1965a) is that confirmation cannot be adequately defined by linguistic means alone. Here he cites Goodman (1955) to demonstrate that some hypotheses of the form, “\((x)(Fx \supset Gx)\)”, are not confirmable even by instances of the kind “\(Fc\)” and “\(Gc\)”. If “\(Rx\)” stands for “\(x\) is a raven” and “\(Bx\)” for “\(x\) is blite” (where \(x\) is blite when it has been examined before time \(t\) and is black or has not been examined before \(t\) and is white), then any raven observed before \(t\) and found to be black confirms the hypothesis, “\((x)(Rx \supset Bx)\)”; yet this hypothesis implies that all ravens not examined before \(t\) are white, a consequence that, in Hempel’s language, “must surely count as disconfirmed rather than as confirmed”. And he endorses Goodman’s suggestion that whether a universal conditional is capable of being confirmed by its positive instances turns out to depend upon the character of its constituent predicates and their past use. Goodman (1955) draws a distinction between universal conditional generalizations that can be confirmed by their instances and those that cannot, where the former are said to be “projectible”. Those that can be projected from examined cases to unexamined ones are those that have a history of past projections. Thus, the predicate “black” has many past projections, but the predicate “blite” does not. Since a history of past projections enhances the projectibility of predicates only when they are successful, the measure of a predicate’s degree of projectibility, which Goodman calls its degree of entrenchment, is the relative frequency of its successful use in past predictions. Hume observed that, no matter how consistently a regularity has held in the past, that provides no guarantee it will continue to hold in the future. Goodman nevertheless adopted the past as a guide, which qualifies as his solution to the linguistic version of Hume’s problem of induction. Since Goodman is offering a pragmatic solution for (what most would assume to be) a syntactical and semantical problem, it may be useful to consider whether or not there might be a more promising approach. In embracing Goodman’s approach, Hempel was modifying his conception of lawlike sentences as extensional generalizations which are restricted to purely qualitative predicates which make no mention of specific individuals, specific places or specific times, but which might, in special cases, reference samples or exemplars, such as the standard meter or the atomic clock (Hempel 1965d: 269, where he also mentions Popper’s notion of universal predicates). Goodman’s account does not actually capture the concept of laws but the rather restricted notion of hypotheses that have been projected and are supposed to be laws. Laws themselves, after all, exist even when they have not yet been discovered, as in the case of Archimedes’ principle before Archimedes, Snell’s law before Snell, and Newton’s before Newton. A more promising approach lay in the direction of universals in Popper’s sense, which are dispositions with subjunctive force, where laws can be characterized as unrestricted intensional conditionals. Popper (1965, 1968) championed falsifiability as a criterion of demarcation that is more appropriate than verifiability as a criterion of meaningfulness, on the ground that what we need is a basis for distinguishing scientific from nonscientific statements, where the latter can still be meaningful, even when they are not scientific. He suggested that laws should be understood as having the force of prohibitions, which are empirically testable by attempts to falsify them. And he observed there are no “paradoxes of falsification” to parallel the “paradoxes of confirmation”. Even in the case of material conditionals, the only falsifying instances are those that combine the truth of their antecedents with the falsity of their consequents. Relative to “\((x)(Rx \supset Bx)\)”, for example, the only potential falsifiers are instances of “\(Rx\)” that are instances of “\(\neg Bx\)”, and similarly for “\((x)(\neg Bx \supset \neg Rx)\)” and for “\((x)(\neg Rx \vee Bx)\)”, not to mention its subjunctive counterpart, “\((x)(Rx \rightarrow Bx)\)”. The absence of paradox suggested that Popper’s approach to problems of demarcation and of cognitive significance might possess substantial advantages over the alternatives.