 What may come as some surprise is that Hempel exposed yet another significant problem confronting the theory of scientific explanation. One of the most remarkable features of his career is that he continued to publish original and innovative studies well into his eightieth decade. Rather surprisingly, he authored a series of articles that moved away from the influential conception of scientific theories as formal calculi combined with empirical interpretations that had been characteristic of logical empiricism. In Hempel (1966a), at the time, the most widely adopted introduction to the philosophy of science, which has been translated into ten other languages, he advanced the novel explication of scientific theories as consisting of internal principles and bridge principles, where the lawlike hypotheses that distinguish theories are linked to observation, measurement, and experiment by principles expressed in various mixtures of ordinary and of technical language. Now antecedent understanding replaces explicit definability, which seems to have been, in part, a response to the demise of the observational/theoretical distinction. Even more strikingly, Hempel (1988a,b) observed that the application of scientific theories presupposes the absence of factors that might affect the internal principles of the theory, which goes beyond the content of the theory itself. Deriving predictions and explanations from classical mechanics presupposes that bodies are being acted upon exclusively by gravitational forces, for example, where the presence of electromagnetic forces would invalidate those derivations. This is not simply a matter of conducting tests “under suitable conditions”, where the malleability of gold differs when struck by a hammer when at extremely cold temperatures (where the combustibility of paper differs when the paper is wet, and so on), which are familiar examples of the various specific conditions that must be identified in complete definitions of dispositional predicates. What Hempel noticed is that these properties may not only be affected by conditions covered by the theory being applied but involve entirely different theories. He took this to mean that the application of theories has to be accompanied by “provisos” affirming that no properties beyond those specified by the theory are present in a specific case. The function of these provisos means that instrumentalist constructions of scientific theories as mere calculating devices and programs for the elimination of theoretical language by reduction to observational language alone are misguided and cannot be sustained. And this is because, if other theoretical properties make a difference to the application of a particular theory, then the observational consequences of that theory cannot be assumed to obtain in any instance without provisos about other theoretical properties beyond those specified by the theory, which requires separate investigation on the basis of observation, measurement, and experiment. The conditions for testing, confirming or falsifying alternative hypotheses and theories is thereby rendered vastly more complex than had previously been supposed. Strikingly, as an essential element of an adequate explanation, Coffa (1973) had advanced “extremal clauses” that assert that no factors other than those specified by the initial conditions of the explanans are relevant to the occurrence of the explanandum event. Indeed, Salmon points out that, since the application of every law involves a tacit extremal (or “ceteris paribus”) clause, any law can be protected from refutation by discounting disconfirming evidence on the expedient of claiming that, because the clause was not satisfied, the law is still correct, which is another way to accent the source of Hempel’s concern (Salmon 1989: 84–85). These observations are related to the claim that “the laws of physics lie”, which has been suggested by Nancy Cartwright (1983). She has claimed that there are theoretical laws, which are supposed to be “simple” but rarely if ever instantiated, and phenomenological laws, which are frequently instantiated but typically if not always complex. Armstrong (1983: 137–140) draws a distinction between laws that are “iron” and have no exceptions and those that are “oaken” and have no exceptions as long as no interfering conditions are present. In his language, unless Cartwright has overlooked the possibility that some laws might be both complex and true, she seems to be saying that theoretical laws are “oaken” laws for which there are no “iron” counterparts. If that is right, then she has failed to appreciate the distinction between counterfactual conditionals (which may be true in spite of having no instances) and mere indicative conditionals (which may be true because they have no instances). Alternatively, the “provisos” problem implies that satisfying the requirement of maximal specificity may be more demanding than has been generally understood in the past. Either way, Cartwright’s theses appear to trade on an equivocation between the non-existence of “iron” counterparts and their non-availability: even if the “iron” laws within a domain are not yet known, it does not follow that those laws do not exist. Recent studies of the problem of provisos include Earman and Roberts (1999), Glymour (2002), Kowalenko (2009) and Reutlinger (2014).