 The last forty years have been dominated by the classical view that (at least higher) human cognition is analogous to symbolic computation in digital computers. On the classical account, information is represented by strings of symbols, just as we represent data in computer memory or on pieces of paper. The connectionist claims, on the other hand, that information is stored non-symbolically in the weights, or connection strengths, between the units of a neural net. The classicist believes that cognition resembles digital processing, where strings are produced in sequence according to the instructions of a (symbolic) program. The connectionist views mental processing as the dynamic and graded evolution of activity in a neural net, each unit’s activation depending on the connection strengths and activity of its neighbors. On the face of it, these views seem very different. However many connectionists do not view their work as a challenge to classicism and some overtly support the classical picture. So-called implementational connectionists seek an accommodation between the two paradigms. They hold that the brain’s net implements a symbolic processor. True, the mind is a neural net; but it is also a symbolic processor at a higher and more abstract level of description. So the role for connectionist research according to the implementationalist is to discover how the machinery needed for symbolic processing can be forged from neural network materials, so that classical processing can be reduced to the neural network account. However, many connectionists resist the implementational point of view. Such radical connectionists claim that symbolic processing was a bad guess about how the mind works. They complain that classical theory does a poor job of explaining graceful degradation of function, holistic representation of data, spontaneous generalization, appreciation of context, and many other features of human intelligence which are captured in their models. The failure of classical programming to match the flexibility and efficiency of human cognition is by their lights a symptom of the need for a new paradigm in cognitive science. So radical connectionists would eliminate symbolic processing from cognitive science forever. The controversy between radical and implementational connectionists is complicated by the invention of what are called hybrid connectionist architectures. Here elements of classical symbolic processing are included in neural nets (Wermter & Sun 2000). For example, Miikkulainen (1993) champions a complex collection of neural net modules that share data coded in activation patterns. Since one of the modules acts as a memory, the system taken as a whole resembles a classical processor with separate mechanisms for storing and operating on digital “words”. Smolensky (1990) is famous for inventing so called tensor product methods for simulating the process of variable binding, where symbolic information is stored at and retrieved from known “locations”. More recently, Eliasmith (2013) has proposed complex and massive architectures that use what are called semantic pointers, which exhibit features of classical variable binding. Once hybrid architectures such as these are on the table, it becomes more difficult to classify a given connectionist model as radical or merely implementational. This opens the interesting prospect that whether symbolic processing is actually present in the human brain may turn out to be a matter of degree. The disagreement concerning the degree to which human cognition involves symbolic processing is naturally embroiled with the innateness debate—whether higher level abilities such as language and reasoning are part of the human genetic endowment, or whether they are learned. The success of connectionist models at learning tasks starting from randomly chosen weights gives heart to empiricists, who would think that the infant brain is able to construct intelligence from perceptual input using a simple learning mechanism (Elman et al. 1996). On the other hand, nativists in the rationalist tradition argue that at least for grammar-based language, the poverty of perceptual stimulus (Chomsky 1965: 58) entails the existence of a genetically determined mechanism tailored to learning grammar. However, the alignment between connectionism and non-nativism is not so clear-cut. There is no reason that connectionist models cannot be interpreted from a nativist point of view, where the ongoing “learning” represents the process of evolutionary refinement from generation to generation of a species. The idea that the human brain has domain specific knowledge that is genetically determined can be accommodated in the connectionist paradigm by biasing the initial weights of the models to make that knowledge easy or trivial to learn. Connectionist research makes best contact with the innateness debate by providing a new strategy for disarming poverty of stimulus arguments. Nativists argue that association of ideas, the mechanism for learning proposed by the traditional empiricist, is too slender a reed to support the development of higher level cognitive abilities. They suppose that innate mechanisms are essential for learning (for example) a grammar of English from a child’s linguistic input, because the statistical regularities available to “mere association” massively underdetermine that grammar. Connectionism could support an empiricism here by providing a proof-of-concept that such structured knowledge can be learned from inputs available to humans using only learning mechanisms found in non-classical architectures. Of course it is too soon to tell whether this promise can be realized.