 What, finally, should we make of Lewis's conception of fundamental ontology? A complicated question; I will limit discussion to just two important worries. Let's begin by noting the obvious influence of a certain scientifically-informed conception of the world in shaping Lewis's picture of reality. Lewis himself is quite explicit about this influence: But there is a less acknowledged influence of first-order predicate logic—an influence that is not entirely salutary. It is undoubtedly tempting, for philosophers steeped in the use of first-order logic as a clarifying tool, to assume that the proper representation of the ultimate structure of reality must be by means of some (interpreted) first-order language—a language whose various predicates could be taken to express the various fundamental properties and relations that characterize reality at its most basic level. But if we look to physics instead—as we surely ought to—we find that the basic representational tools are variables, that correspond to physical magnitudes. Taking seriously the picture of fundamental ontology suggested by these representations turns out to matter quite a bit: in particular, there are reasons to think that none of the first three theses about natural properties and relations—that they are minimal, non-modal, and intrinsic—is tenable without some modification. This issue—which we will mostly pass over in what follows, except where it matters—is explored in more detail in the The second significant source of concern about Lewis's conception of fundamental ontology is the role—or rather lack thereof—that modal notions have in it. This concern has two aspects. First, one might hold that some, at least, of the fundamental properties and relations that characterize reality have modal aspects that are ontologically basic. Consider mass: one might hold that it is metaphysically impossible for there to be a world containing just two massive particles, accelerating away from each other—and that this impossibility somehow flows from the nature of mass itself. We will take up this issue in more detail in the companion article on Lewis's applied metaphysics. Second, one might hold that it is one thing to state a thesis concerning what the fundamental structure of reality in fact happens to be; but that it is another, separate matter to state how reality could be. Indeed, most metaphysicians, I suspect, take it to be just blindingly obvious that these are conceptually distinct tasks. Granted that one's views on what there is, and what it is like, will have ramifications for one's views on what there could be and what it could be like (most obviously, because things could be the way they are; but there may be more interesting and subtle connections as well); still, the project of laying out the former views does not automatically complete the project of laying out the latter. Of course there is a sense in which Lewis agrees: he takes it as obvious, after all, that he must supply an account of modality. But the strikingly reductionist character of that account shows that such agreement as there is is mighty thin. The next article (forthcoming) will help clarify this quite radical aspect to Lewis's metaphysics.