 The opening line of the Sixth Meditation makes clear its principal objective: “It remains for me to examine whether material things exist” (AT 7:71, CSM 2:50). At this juncture, the meditator perfectly knows of his own existence and of God’s. It follows that there’s an external world with at least one object, namely, God. However, the existence of an external material world remains in doubt. Establishing the existence of material bodies is not a straightforward matter of perceiving them, because, in Descartes’ view, “bodies are not strictly perceived by the senses” (see  Section 9.1). In his eventual argument, Descartes’ strategy for proving an external material world has two main parts: first, he argues for the externality of the causes of sensation; second, he argues for the materiality of these external causes. (Calling the ideas in question “sensations” can seem circular, if one conceives of sensations as having a physiological component. But note that for Descartes, “what is called ‘having a sensory perception’,” strictly encompasses only a mental aspect. Med. 2, AT 7:29, CSM 2:19) From these two steps, it follows that there exists an external material world. Let’s consider each phase of the argument. Descartes builds on a familiar line of argument in the history of philosophy, itself appealing to the involuntariness of sensations. The familiar argument is first articulated in the Third Meditation. Speaking of his apparently adventitious ideas (sensations), the meditator remarks: Though some such involuntariness argument has convinced many philosophers, the inference does not hold up to methodical doubt, as the meditator explains: We first examined this passage in regards to the Always Dreaming Doubt. That doubt raises the problem of the existence of external things. For all I know, my “waking” experiences are produced not by external things, but by processes similar to those producing my dreams. This sceptical hypothesis explains why the familiar involuntariness argument fails: the inference presupposes exactly what is at issue – namely, whether involuntarily received sensory ideas are produced by external things, rather than by a subconscious faculty of my mind. Many philosophers have assumed that we lack the epistemic resources to solve this sceptical problem. For example, Hume writes: Interestingly, Descartes would agree that experiential resources cannot solve the problem. By the Sixth Meditation, however, Descartes purports to have the innate resources he needs to solve it – notably, innate ideas of mind and body. Among the metaphysical theses he develops is that mind and body have wholly distinct essences: the essence of thinking substance is pure thought; the essence of body is pure extension. In a remarkable maneuver, Descartes invokes this distinction to refute the sceptical worry that sensations are produced by a subconscious faculty of the mind: “nothing can be in me, that is to say, in my mind, of which I am not aware,” and this “follows from the fact that the soul is distinct from the body and that its essence is to think” (13 Dec 1640 letter to Mersenne, AT 3:273, CSMK 165f). This result allows Descartes to supplement the involuntariness argument, thereby strengthening the inference. For from the additional premise that nothing can be in my mind of which I am unaware, it follows that if sensations were being produced by some activity in my mind, I’d be aware of that activity on the occasion of its operation. Since I’m not thus aware, it follows that the sensation I’m having is produced by a cause external to my mind. As Descartes writes, this cause It follows that my sensations are caused by external world objects – i.e., objects external to my mind. It remains to be shown that these external causes are material objects. On Descartes’ analysis, there are three possible options for the kind of external thing causing sensations: That is, the cause is either infinite substance (God), or finite substance; and if finite, then either corporeal, or something else. Descartes thinks he eliminates options (a) and (c) by appeal to God being no deceiver: This is a problematic passage. The “great propensity” here cited is not the irresistible compulsion of clear and distinct perception. (If it were, the conclusion that sensation is caused by material objects would follow straightaway from this clear and distinct perception, via the C&D Rule.) But unless each step of the argument is clearly and distinctly perceived, Descartes should not be making the argument. Adding to the difficulties of the passage, he expressly cites the conclusion as following from the fact that “God is not a deceiver,” implying that he thinks this inference is supported by a divine guarantee. On one kind of interpretation, Descartes relaxes his epistemic standards in the Sixth Meditation (cf. Schmitt 1986, 493f). He no longer insists on perfect knowledge, now settling for probabilistic arguments. Though no decisive texts support the interpretation, it does find some support. For instance, in the Synopsis to the Meditations, Descartes writes of his Sixth Meditation arguments: The remark can be read as a concession that the Sixth Meditation arguments are weaker than the earlier arguments about minds and God – that these later arguments do not “prove what they establish.” Of course, one need not read the remark this way. And other texts are unfavorable to this interpretation. For example, in the opening paragraphs of the Sixth Meditation, Descartes considers a probabilistic argument for the existence of external bodies. Though he accepts the proposed account as offering the best explanation, he nonetheless dismisses it for the express reason that it grounds “only a probability” – it does not provide the “basis for a necessary inference that some body exists” (AT 7:73, CSM 2:51). This is a puzzling dismissal, assuming Descartes has relaxed his standards to probable inference. The relaxed standards interpretation falls short for another reason. It leaves unexplained why Descartes cites a divine guarantee for the conclusion that sensations are caused by material objects. On another kind of interpretation, the troubling passage appealing to a “great propensity” does not mark a relaxing of epistemic standards. Instead, Descartes is extending the implications of his discussion of theodicy in the Fourth Meditation to encompass further cases of natural belief – such beliefs deriving from our God-given cognitive nature. It was noted above  (Section 5.2)  that Descartes thinks the divine guarantee of the C&D Rule follows, in part, from the fact that God wouldn’t allow us to be mistaken if the assent is a natural consequence of our God-given cognitive nature. Suppose Descartes holds that there are further cases in which an all-perfect God would not allow us to be in error, in part because the beliefs in question arise naturally from our God-given cognitive nature. And suppose the further cases involve a natural propensity to believe which cannot be corrected by our cognitive faculties. Given these assumptions, the resulting rule for truth would look something like the following: This rule is more expansive than the C&D Rule, in that it licenses more kinds of judgments. Clauses (i) and (ii) are tailored to the problematic passage wherein, as we’ve seen, Descartes invokes two conditions: “God has given me no faculty at all for recognizing any such source for these ideas; on the contrary, he has given me a great propensity to believe that they are produced by corporeal things.” If this is on the right interpretive track, then Descartes needs some way to justify this rule. Assuming a proof similar in structure to the proof of the C&D Rule, the justification might run as follows: If Descartes affirms premise 2, it explains why he thinks he’s entitled to this more expansive rule, and without relaxing his epistemic standards. Indeed, a number of texts indicate that he holds some version of premise 2. In the relevant Sixth Meditation passage, Descartes adds that from “the very fact that God is not a deceiver” there is a “consequent impossibility of there being any falsity in my opinions which cannot be corrected by some other faculty supplied by God” (AT 7:80, CSM 2:55f). In another passage he writes that we would be “doing God an injustice” if we implied “that God had endowed us with such an imperfect nature that even the proper use of our powers of reasoning allowed us to go wrong” (Prin. 3:43, AT 8a:99, CSM 1:255). And in the Second Replies, Descartes addresses case of judgments that “could not be corrected by any clearer judgements or by means of any other natural faculty,” adding that “in such cases I simply assert that it is impossible for us to be deceived” (Replies 2, AT 7:143f, CSM 2:102f). These passages make a strong case that something like premise 2 is in play, indeed implying that God’s benevolent nature entails a more expansive rule of truth than the C&D Rule. As will emerge, Descartes looks again to call on this more expansive rule in his effort to prove that he is not dreaming. Earlier, we noted another apparent problem in the Sixth Meditation passage wherein Descartes concludes that the external cause of sensation is something corporeal. One of his premises cites a great propensity to believe, yet the propensity is not itself the irresistible compulsion of clear and distinct perception. Does not the methodic procedure of the Meditations restrict Descartes to clear and distinct premises? By way of reply, distinguish (a) that my sensation has an external cause, and (b) that I have a great propensity to believe my sensation has an external cause. In context, the meditator lacks clear and distinct perception of (a). However, the relevant premise of the argument (as opposed to its conclusion) is not (a), but (b). And there is no principled reason that the meditator cannot clearly and distinctly perceive this premise. A final observation. It is often unnoticed that the conclusion of Descartes’ argument for the existence of an external material world leaves significant scepticism in place. Granting the success of the argument, my sensations are caused by an external material world. But for all the argument shows – for all the broader argument of the Meditations shows, up to this point – my mind might be joined to a brain in a vat, rather than a full human body. This isn’t an oversight on Descartes’ part. It’s all he thinks the argument can prove. For even at this late stage of the project, the meditator has not yet established himself to be awake – a line of inquiry to which we now turn. Further reading: For a variation of the Sixth Meditation argument for the existence of the external material world, see Descartes’ Prin. 2.1. See also Friedman (1997), Garber (1992), and Newman (1994). On the respects in which the Sixth Meditation inference draws on Fourth Meditation work, see Newman (1999). For an interpretation of the Sixth Meditation argument that’s consistent with a direct realist interpretation, see Carriero (2009, 146ff).