 Historically, there are at least two distinct dream-related doubts. The one doubt undermines the judgment that I am presently awake – call this the ‘Now Dreaming Doubt’. The other doubt undermines the judgment that I am ever awake (i.e., in the way normally supposed) – call this the ‘Always Dreaming Doubt’. A textual case can be made on behalf of both formulations being raised in the Meditations. Both doubts appeal to some version of the thesis that the experiences we take as dreams are (at their best) qualitatively similar to those we take as waking – call this the ‘Similarity Thesis’. The Similarity Thesis may be formulated in a variety of strengths. A strong Similarity Thesis might contend that some dreams seem experientially similar to waking, even on hindsight subsequent to waking; a weaker rendering of the thesis might contend merely that dreams seem similar to waking while having them, but not upon waking. Arguably, the sceptical doubt is equally potent on either rendering. Even so, on the most natural reading, the First Meditation passage seems to suggest the stronger view, with its reference to “exactly similar thoughts”: As for the range of experiences that we can suppose dreams able to imitate, Descartes looks to hold that every kind of sensory experience is subject to the doubt. He writes: “every sensory experience I have ever thought I was having while awake I can also think of myself as sometimes having while asleep” (Med. 6, AT 7:77, CSM 2:53). The Similarity Thesis is sufficient to generate straightaway the Now Dreaming Doubt. Since I can think of a dream as being qualitatively similar to my present experience, then, for all I know, I am now dreaming. Recall that Descartes’ method requires only a justification-defeating doubt, not a belief-defeating doubt. To lack perfect knowledge of my being awake, I need not give up my belief that I’m awake; nor need that belief be false – I might, in fact, be awake. The Now Dreaming Doubt does its epistemic damage so long as it undermines my reasons for believing I’m awake. And at this stage of the Meditations, Descartes thinks that it does: “there are never any sure signs by means of which being awake can be distinguished from being asleep” (Med. 1, AT 7:19, CSM 2:13). The conclusion – that I don’t perfectly know that I’m now awake – has widespread sceptical consequences. For if I don’t know this, then neither do I know that I’m now “holding this piece of paper in my hands,” to cite an example the meditator had supposed to be “quite impossible” to doubt. Reflection on the Now Dreaming Doubt changes his mind. He comes around to the view that, for all he knows, the sensible objects of his present experience are mere figments of a vivid dream. Much ado has been made about whether dreaming arguments are self-refuting. According to an influential objection, similarity theses presuppose that we can reliably distinguish dreams and waking – we need first to distinguish them, in order to compare them; yet the conclusion of dreaming arguments entails that we cannot reliably distinguish. Therefore, if the conclusion of such an argument is true, then the premise invoking the Similarity Thesis cannot be. Some formulations of dreaming arguments are indeed self-refuting in this way. Of present interest is whether all are – specifically, whether Descartes makes the mistake. Interestingly, he does not. His formulation presupposes simply the truism that we do, in fact, make a distinction between dreaming and waking (never mind whether reliably). He states the relevant premise in terms of what we think of as dreams, versus what we think of as waking: “every sensory experience I have ever thought I was having while awake I can also think of myself as sometimes having while asleep” (AT 7:77, CSM 2:53, italics added). This formulation avoids the charge of self-refutation, for it is compatible with the conclusion that we cannot reliably distinguish dreams and waking. Does Descartes also put forward a second dreaming argument, the Always Dreaming Doubt? There is strong textual evidence to support this (see Newman 1994), though it is by no means the standard interpretation. The conclusion of the Always Dreaming Doubt is generated from the very same Similarity Thesis, together with a further sceptical assumption, namely: that for all I know, the processes producing what I take as waking are no more veridical than those producing what I take as dreams. As the meditator puts it: The aim of the Always Dreaming Doubt is to undermine not whether I’m now awake, but whether so-called “sensation” is produced by external objects even on the assumption that I am now awake. For in the cases of both waking and dreaming, my cognitive access extends only to the productive result, but not the productive process. On what basis, then, do I conclude that the productive processes are different – that external objects play more of a role in waking than in dreaming? For all I know, both sorts of experience are produced by some subconscious faculty of my mind. As Descartes has his meditator say: The sceptical consequences of the Always Dreaming Doubt are even more devastating than those of the Now Dreaming Doubt. If I do not know that “normal waking” experience is produced by external objects, then, for all I know, all of my experiences might be dreams of a sort. For all I know, there might not be an external world. My best evidence of an external world derives from my preconceived opinion that external world objects produce my waking experiences. Yet the Always Dreaming Doubt calls this into question: The two dreaming doubts are parasitic on the same Similarity Thesis, though their sceptical consequences differ. The Now Dreaming Doubt raises the universal possibility of delusion: for any one of my sensory experiences, it is possible (for all I know) that the experience is delusive. The Always Dreaming Doubt raises the possibility of universal delusion: it is possible (for all I know) that all my sensory experiences are delusions (say, from a God’s-eye perspective). Though dreaming doubts do significant demolition work, they are light-duty bulldozers relative to Descartes’ most power sceptical doubt. What further judgments are left to be undermined? Following the discussion of dreaming, the meditator tentatively concludes that the results of empirical disciplines “are doubtful” – e.g., “physics, astronomy, medicine,” and the like. Whereas: Early in the Third Meditation, it emerges that even truths this “simple and straightforward” are subject to hyperbolic doubt (AT 7:35f, CSM 2:25). And immediately following the above First Meditation passage, Descartes introduces his most hyperbolic doubt – the hypothesis of an all-powerful deceiver. There is variation in the interpretation of the doubt, even concerning the number of deceivers Descartes means to be citing. I suggest that a natural reading of the First Meditation passages provides for a unified account of a deceiver hypothesis. The passage represents the meditator as having long believed in a creator who’s both all-powerful and all-good. Here’s the thinking that seems to follow from such belief. A creator with these attributes would not allow its creatures to be deceived about the existence of the external world, nor about such transparent truths as that 2+3=5. But likewise, neither should a creator with these attributes allow its creatures ever to be deceived. Yet they are. Since even occasional deception seems to pose a reductio on the very existence of an all-powerful, all-good creator, the implication is that the creator (if there be one) must be lacking in either power or goodness. Suppose the creator is all-powerful but not all-good – i.e., an “evil genius” of sorts. In that case, it seems we might be deceived about even the most evident of matters. This summary offers a coherent basis for a truly hyperbolic doubt. And notice that the summary makes good sense of both of the following First Meditation passages, suggesting each is part of a continuous worry about the very same deceiver who’s all-powerful, but not all-good: And yet firmly rooted in my mind is the long-standing opinion that there is an omnipotent God who made me the kind of creature that I am. How do I know that he has not brought it about that there is no earth, no sky, no extended thing, no shape, no size, no place, while at the same time ensuring that all these things appear to me to exist just as they do now? What is more, since I sometimes believe that others go astray in cases where they think they have the most perfect knowledge, may I not similarly go wrong every time I add two and three or count the sides of a square, or in some even simpler matter, if that is imaginable? But perhaps God would not have allowed me to be deceived in this way, since he is said to be supremely good. But if it were inconsistent with his goodness to have created me such that I am deceived all the time, it would seem equally foreign to his goodness to allow me to be deceived even occasionally; yet this last assertion cannot be made. (AT 7:21, CSM 2:14) I will suppose therefore that not God, who is supremely good and the source of truth, but rather some malicious demon [mauvais génie] of the utmost power and cunning has employed all his energies in order to deceive me. (AT 7:21, CSM 2:15) Some commentators take these passages to introduce two separate deceivers – distinguishing the evil genius (mauvais génie) from the deceiving God (cf. Gouhier 1937, 163). But this introduces needless complication without sufficient textual justification. The deceptions of both deceivers derive from having supreme power, while lacking in goodness. And note that Descartes expresses ambivalence as to whether even to refer to a deceiver as “God”: while invoking hyperbolic doubt, the Second Meditation references the deceiver as “a God, or whatever I may call him” (AT 7:24, CSM 2:16). In any case, a single deceiver hypothesis will hereafter be assumed, referring to it by its popular designation, the “Evil Genius Doubt.” It is tempting to assume that the Evil Genius Doubt draws its sceptical force from the “utmost power” attributed to the deceiver. Clear texts suggest a different reading. Descartes contends that an equally powerful doubt derives from the supposition that we are not the creatures of an all-powerful creator. Recall that the above reductio reasoning implies simply that the creator cannot be both all-powerful and all-good. Suppose, then, that we give-up the assumption that the creator is all-powerful. The passage continues: That is, this assumption, too, generates hyperbolic sceptical consequences. Descartes makes the same point in a parallel passage of the Principles: Descartes’ official position is that the Evil Genius Doubt is merely one among multiple hypotheses that can motivate the more general hyperbolic doubt. (See Cunning 2014, 68ff, and Hatfield 2006, 126, for variations on this theme.) Fundamentally, the more general doubt is about our cognitive nature, that is, about the possibility our minds are flawed. The First Meditation texts are somewhat ambiguous on this count. But later passages are very clear (a theme we’ll develop more fully in  Section 4.3). What is essential to the doubt is not the specific story about the origin of our cognitive wiring; it’s instead the realization – regardless the story – that for all we know, our cognitive wiring is flawed. Even so, I regularly speak in terms of the evil genius (following Descartes’ lead), as a kind of mnemonic for the more general doubt about our cognitive nature. Having introduced the Evil Genius Doubt, the First Meditation program of demolition is not only hyperbolic but universal. As the meditator remarks, I “am finally compelled to admit that there is not one of my former beliefs about which a doubt may not properly be raised” (Med. 1, AT 7:21, CSM 2:14f). As will emerge, the early paragraphs of the Third Meditation clarify a further nuance of the Evil Genius Doubt – a nuance consistently observed thereafter. Descartes clarifies, there, that the Evil Genius Doubt operates in an indirect manner (a topic to which we return in  Section 4.3). Further reading: On Descartes’ sceptical arguments, see Bouwsma (1949), Cunning (2014), Curley (1978), Hatfield (2006), Larmore (2014), Newman (1994), Newman and Nelson (1999), Williams (1986 and 1995). For a contrary reading of the Evil Genius Doubt, see Gewirth (1941) and Wilson (1978). For a more general philosophical treatment of dreaming arguments, see Dunlap (1977) and Williams (1978).