 Students of philosophy can expect to be taught a longstanding interpretation according to which Descartes’ broader argument is viciously circular. He first argues from clearly and distinctly perceived premises to the conclusion that an all-perfect God exists; he then argues from the premise that an all-perfect God exists to the conclusion that whatever is clearly and distinctly perceived is true. The worry is that he presupposes the C&D Rule in the effort to prove the C&D Rule. Despite its prima facie plausibility, Descartes scholarship generally resists the vicious circularity interpretation, based on numerous textual considerations. But even putting those texts to the side, it should be surprising that the project would be viciously circular. As Thomas Lennon notes: Consider first what every plausible interpretation must concede: that the two main steps of the broader argument unfold in a manner suggestive of a circle – let us indeed refer to them as ‘arcs’. The Third Meditation arguments for God define one arc: The Fourth Meditation argument defines a second arc: That the broader argument unfolds in accord with these two steps is uncontroversial. The question of interest concerns whether, strictly speaking, these arcs form an epistemic circle. The statement of Arc 1 admits of considerable ambiguity. How one resolves this ambiguity determines whether the arcs strictly form a circle. Let’s begin by clarifying what Arc 1 would have to mean to generate vicious circularity. We’ll then consider the main alternative interpretations of that arc by which commentators avoid a vicious circle. Vicious Circularity interpretation: Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived – i.e., premises that are accepted only because of having first accepted the general veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly perceived. Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that an all-perfect God exists. Thus rendered, Descartes’ broader argument is viciously circular. The italicized segment of Arc 1 marks an addition to the original statement of it, thereby clarifying the circularity reading. Interpreted in this way, Descartes begins his Third Meditation proofs of God by presupposing the general veracity of clear and distinct perception. That is, he starts by assuming the C&D Rule and then uses the rule in the course of demonstrating it. Evidently, this way of reading Descartes’ argument has pedagogical appeal, for it is widely taught (outside of Descartes scholarship) despite the absence of serious textual merit. If there is one point of general agreement in the secondary literature, it is that the texts do not sustain this interpretation. How then should Arc 1 be understood? There are countless interpretations that avoid vicious circularity, along with numerous schemes for cataloguing them. For present purposes, let’s catalogue the various accounts according to two main kinds of non-circular strategies that commentators attribute to Descartes. (The secondary literature offers multiple variations of each of these main kinds of interpretations, though the variations won’t here be explored.) Bounded Doubt interpretations: Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived – indeed, premises belonging to a special class of truths that are fully immune to doubt prior to establishing the general veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly perceived. Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that an all-perfect God exists. Again, the italicized segment marks an addition to the original statement of Arc 1. Call this a ‘Bounded Doubt’ interpretation, because this kind of interpretation construes hyperbolic doubt as bounded. More precisely, the Evil Genius Doubt is (on this reading) bounded in the sense that its sceptical potency does not extend to all judgments: a special class of truths is outside the bounds of doubt. Exemplary of this special class are the cogito and, importantly, the premises of the Third Meditation proofs of God. Propositions in this special class can be perfectly known, even by atheists. On this interpretation, there is no vicious circularity in the broader argument, because the truths serving as premises in the arguments for the C&D Rule are perfectly knowable independently of that rule. That is, throughout the arguments of Arcs 1 and 2, the premises employed count as perfectly knowledge prior to the knowledge of the C&D Rule they help establish. Proponents of this interpretation are apt to cite Third Meditation passage distinguishing what’s revealed by the natural light, and what’s taught by nature (see  Section 4.3).  In order to extend perfect knowledge beyond the privileged class of truths (revealed by the natural light), it is necessary to establish the general veracity of the C&D Rule. Thus, the need (on this interpretation) for Arc 2 in the broader project. The other main kind of interpretation avoids circularity in a different manner. Let’s consider that alternative. Unbounded Doubt interpretations: Arc 1: The conclusion that an all-perfect God exists is derived from premises that are clearly and distinctly perceived – i.e., premises that are accepted despite being vulnerable to Evil Genius Doubt, because our cognitive nature compels us to assent to clearly and distinctly perceived propositions. Arc 2: The general veracity of propositions that are clearly and distinctly perceived is derived from the conclusion that an all-perfect God exists. Again, the italicized segment marks an addition to the original statement of Arc 1. Let’s call this an ‘Unbounded Doubt’ interpretation, because this kind of interpretation construes hyperbolic doubt as unbounded. More precisely, the Evil Genius Doubt is (on this reading) unbounded in the sense that it undermines all manner of judgments – even the cogito, even the premises of the Third Meditation proofs of God – when the mind is no longer attending to them clearly and distinctly. Insofar as the meditator assents to the steps of these proofs, he does so not because of having an understanding of clear and distinct perceptions as being guaranteed true, but because the mind cannot but assent to them while attending clearly and distinctly. Importantly, if doubt is thus unbounded there is no circularity. For, on this reading of Arc 1, the arguments therein do not presuppose the general veracity of the C&D Rule. The premises contributing to the conclusion of an all-perfect God remain vulnerable to hyperbolic doubt. Throughout this stage of the inquiry, none of the meditator’s judgments based in clear and distinct perception constitutes perfect knowledge. It is the unboundedness of hyperbolic doubt that underwrites the No Atheistic Perfect Knowledge Thesis. A central feature of this interpretation is worth repeating. It is natural for critics to ask why the arguments of Arc 1 are accepted by the meditator if, indeed, Evil Genius Doubt remains in play. The answer lies in our earlier discussion of the indirect manner in which the doubt undermines clear and distinct perception  (Section 4.3).  While clearly and distinctly attending to a proposition, the mind cannot but assent: “my nature is such that so long as I perceive something very clearly and distinctly I cannot but believe it to be true.” Therefore, while the meditator attends to the steps of the Third Meditation arguments for God, he cannot but accept them. However, the meditator does not (yet) have perfect knowledge of those premises, nor of their conclusions. How, then do those matters finally rise to the status of perfect knowledge? We return to this issue, below. At present, the focus is on the issue of circularity. Though bounded and unbounded doubt interpretations both avoid vicious circularity, each confronts further difficulties, both textual and philosophical. Avoiding the charge of vicious circularity marks the beginning of the interpreter’s work, not the end. Bounded doubt interpreters must explain why, in the first place, the Evil Genius Doubt’s potency does not extend to propositions in the special class. Unbounded doubt interpreters must explain why, in the final analysis, the Evil Genius Doubt eventually loses it undermining potency. Let’s consider each of these further problems. Granting a bounded doubt interpretation, why – in the first place – does the Evil Genius Doubt’s potency not extend to propositions in the special class? How is it that the doubt does undermine the proposition “that two and three added together make five,” but not the proposition “that there must be at least as much [reality] in the efficient and total cause as in the effect of that cause”? The first proposition is included in the list of examples that are undermined by the Evil Genius Doubt (see the fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation). The second proposition is a premise in a Third Meditation argument for God – a proposition immune to doubt, according to bounded doubt interpretations. What is supposed to be the relevant difference between these propositions? Given the indirect manner in which Evil Genius Doubt operates, there seems no clear explanation of why the doubt succeeds in undermining the first proposition but is somehow resisted by the second. Further awkward for this interpretation is that the cogito is included in the list of examples that that same fourth paragraph passage implies is vulnerable to doubt. Granting an unbounded doubt interpretation, why – in the final analysis – does the Evil Genius Doubt eventually lose its undermining potency? Putting the point ironically: Why doesn’t the Evil Genius Doubt undermine the very arguments intended to refute the Evil Genius Doubt, as soon as the mind is no longer attending to those premises? Consider Descartes’ own explanation of how hyperbolic doubt undermines the conclusions of arguments once their premises are no longer in the mind’s view: So, when we’re no longer clearly and distinctly perceiving the steps of an argument, we do not “possess the same firm and immutable conviction” of its conclusion. But precisely such moments are when hyperbolic doubt does its undermining work. This means that upon diverting attention from the premises of Arcs 1 and 2, it is then possible to run the Evil Genius Doubt on their conclusions. It would thus seem that unbounded doubt interpretations leave us in a Sisyphus-like predicament. According to the myth, each time Sisyphus pushes his boulder near to the top of the hill, the boulder somehow slips away, rolling to the very bottom, and the whole process must start all over. By carefully constructing the arguments of Arcs 1 and 2, the meditator gains anti-sceptical momentum, pushing his project near to the goal of perfect knowledge. But each time, once his attention is diverted from the steps of the arguments, he finds himself back at the bottom of the hill, wondering about the credibility of those proofs that had seemed so evident: that is, the question now arises “as to whether we possess the same firm and immutable conviction concerning these conclusions, when we simply recollect that they were previously deduced from quite evident principles.” As Michael Ayers writes: Let’s turn to an account that purports to solve this problem with unbounded doubt interpretations. Again, the hard question for unbounded doubt interpretations: Why, in the final analysis, does the Evil Genius Doubt eventually lose it undermining potency? One recent unbounded doubt interpretation (Newman and Nelson 1999) offers a solution, including an explanation of why Descartes waits until the end of the Fifth Meditation to claim final victory over the sceptical problem. Here is a sketch of the account. Descartes claims that his final solution to the sceptical problem makes it “impossible for us ever to have any reason for doubting what we are convinced of.” We’ve seen that the sticking point in the account is indirect doubt. Descartes rejects that we could overcome the problem via uninterrupted clear and distinct perception: “my nature is also such that I cannot fix my mental vision continually on the same thing, so as to keep perceiving it clearly; and often the memory of a previously made judgement may come back, when I am no longer attending to the arguments which led me to make it.” At such moments of inattention, an indirect doubt remains possible, so long as we can make sense of the evil genius scenario, or any other scenario wherein we have a defective cognitive nature. It thus seems that a final solution to the problem would need, somehow, to make it no longer possible to make sense of the relevant sceptical scenarios. Indeed, the interpretation has it the sceptical scenarios become self-evidently incoherent. We come to have an utterly basic apprehension that we’re the creation of an all-perfect creator who would not allow us to be deceived about what we clearly and distinctly perceive. The needed apprehension of God would need to be self-evident. For suppose my apprehension is grounded in a demonstration. In that case, it’s possible to think of the conclusion of that demonstration without also thinking of the premises; and on such occasions, my confidence in the demonstration is vulnerable to an indirect doubt. Thus, the needed apprehension of God is a self-evident, clear and distinct conception that renders – as literally unthinkable – the very sceptical scenarios that underwrite indirect doubt. A useful analogy lies in the doubt-resisting character of the cogito. If I attempt a direct doubt of own my existence, the effort is self-stultifying; I immediately apprehend that I must exist, in order to attempt the doubt. What Descartes needs is a similarly strong and immediate doubt-resisting outcome in connection with attempts at an indirect doubt. That is, on occasions of trying to undermine clearly and distinctly perceived matters – e.g., by doubting God’s existence, or benevolence, or the like – the very effort at doubt would be immediately thwarted. Multiple texts suggest that this is the account Descartes intends, and that the Fifth Meditation is the locus of the meditator’s discovery of an enhanced, apprehension of God. The Fifth Meditation introduces various themes about innate truths, including the positive epistemic effects of repeated meditation: truths initially noticed only by means of inference might eventually come to be apprehended self-evidently. In the build-up to the passage claiming that the Evil Genius Doubt is finally and fully overcome, Descartes writes: Descartes reiterates the theme in the Second Replies: These passages convey that one’s apprehension of God eventually upgrades from being inferential, to being transparently self-evident. Granting that the meditator has achieved an apprehension of God of this kind, it plausibly explains why Descartes would think he’s achieved a final solution to the sceptical problem. Given his newfound epistemic standing, the meditator would be unable to make coherent sense of the Evil Genius Doubt. His clear and distinct perceptions would be fully indubitable, thereby counting as perfect knowledge. The interpretation helps explain two passages wherein Descartes purports to be detailing the final solution to the sceptical problem. In both passages, he can seem simply to be asserting that sceptical doubts are impossible, as if having forgotten the indirect manner in which his own hyperbolic doubt operates. But if we take Descartes to be assuming that the apprehension of God has become utterly self-evident, both passages make more sense. The one passage arises in the Second Replies, in the context of rebutting an objection to the effect that, in the final analysis, it remains possible to doubt clear and distinct perception. Descartes replies that the objector is “still stuck fast” in doubts “put forward in the First Meditation,” but “very carefully removed in the succeeding Meditations,” adding: The other passage arises in the Fifth Meditation, in the concluding summary explanation of how the sceptical problem is finally overcome. Importantly, on the present interpretation, is the context in which the summary explanation occurs: namely, on the heels of revealing the newly discovered thesis, that nothing “is more self-evident than the fact that the supreme being exists.” In that context, Descartes explains that a final solution to the sceptical problem has been achieved. Absent a self-evident apprehension of God, the two passages appear inexplicable, with Descartes seeming to misunderstand the sceptical implications of his own Evil Genius Doubt. But on the self-evident God interpretation, both passages read as a summary of the anti-sceptical effects of it being impossible to conceive of God as a deceiver. As Descartes writes to Voetius, the very thought of God as a deceiver “implies a conceptual contradiction – that is, it cannot be conceived” (May 1643 letter, AT 8b:60, CSMK 222). The interpretation also makes sense of why the final victory over scepticism is announced not at the end of the Fourth Meditation, but at the end the Fifth – after the further result concerning an enhanced, self-evident apprehension of God. Michael Della Rocca has recently argued that a further circle arises from considerations in the Fourth Meditation – a problem he suspects is “more difficult to get out of than the traditional problem of circularity” (2011, 98). To help clarify this further circle, Della Rocca focuses on a twofold question: As Della Rocca understands the broader Fourth Meditation argument, the claim that we should assent only to what we clearly and distinctly perceive is an essential step in the ongoing argument to establish the divine guarantee of clear and distinct perception. Since this step presupposes the eventual conclusion, that conclusion is based on circular reasoning: Perhaps we can avoid this alleged circle. The linchpin of Della Rocca’s charge of circularity is his contention that “Descartes’s reason for saying that we should assent only to clear and distinct ideas is that such ideas are guaranteed to be true and ideas that are not clear and distinct are not guaranteed to be true” (2011, 97). Though Descartes can be read in this way, the texts support the following alternative understanding of the broader argumentative narrative. In the First Meditation, the meditator initially resolves that he should withhold assent to anything which is “not completely certain and indubitable” (AT 7:18, CSM 2:12). Early in the Third Meditation, having reflected on the epistemic impressiveness of the cogito, the meditator discovers that all, but only, clear and distinct perceptions are utterly assent-compelling. As a practical consequence, his initial resolve effectively implies that he should assent only to clear and distinct perceptions – not because of presupposing the conclusion of the eventual proof of the C&D Rule, but because these are the only perceptions to which he can’t but assent. This provides a practical answer to Della Rocca’s question, concerning why we should “not assent to ideas that are not clear and distinct and why is there no such obligation not to assent to clear and distinct ideas.” It is in the Fourth Meditation that the meditator purports to demonstrate the divine guarantee of the C&D Rule. However, no step of that demonstration presupposes that clear and distinct perceptions have already been established as true; i.e., the conclusion of the demonstration is not, as Della Rocca contends, “based on the claim that clear and distinct ideas are guaranteed to be true.” Rather (as we saw in  Section 5.3),  the conclusion purports to be based on an analysis of the respective contributions of the intellect and the will, to judgment formation. Summarizing the key steps: Granted, the meditator needs each of the demonstrative steps to be clearly and distinctly perceived. However, he needs this not because of presupposing the conclusion to be proved, but in order to be in compliance with his own initial resolve, stated in the First Meditation. Central to the above account avoiding Della Rocca’s circle is (among other claims) the thesis that clear and distinct perceptions are assent-compelling – i.e., as Descartes writes, that “the nature of my mind is such that I cannot but assent to these things, at least so long as I clearly perceive them.” It it thus worth noting that Della Rocca wavers on whether Descartes holds this thesis: he interprets a remark in Descartes’ correspondence (9 Feb 1645, AT 4:173, CSMK 245) to suggest “that we can withhold assent from even a current clear and distinct perception” (2006, 155). We noted in  Section 1.1  that Descartes’ clearest statements appear to indicate a justified belief analysis of perfect knowledge. Consider again the relevant Second Replies passage: The last part of the passage emphasizes two conditions: a belief condition, expressed in terms of conviction, and a justification condition, expressed in terms of indubitability or unshakability – “conviction based on a reason so strong that it can never be shaken by any stronger reason.” Conspicuously missing is any further condition stipulating that the conviction must be true. The passage does clarify, of anything that would count as perfect knowledge, that it is “completely accepted as true”; that we are “convinced that it is true,” indeed, that we are “firmly convinced.” But these remarks speak to the belief condition, not the justification condition. Indeed, the passage is plausibly read even more strongly: i.e., not merely as omitting mention of a truth condition, but as confirming some broad possibility that what we regard as indubitable truths are, “absolutely speaking, false.” Why, then, is Descartes dismissive of the stated objection, indicating that it shouldn’t “bother” us? His remarks indicate that he takes the possibility in question as simply a further iteration of Evil Genius Doubt – “I see that you are still stuck fast in the doubts which I put forward in the First Meditation.” Whether a deceiving God is really possible, it’s something Descartes has argued to be unimaginable for perfect knowers, i.e., for successful graduates of the Meditations – “it is impossible to imagine that he [God] is a deceiver.” On a plausible reading, therefore, Descartes is dismissive of the objection not on metaphysical grounds of absolute impossibility, but on epistemic grounds of indubitability: the “alleged ‘absolute falsity’,” noted in the objection, should in no way “bother us” because our conviction is “so firm that it is quite incapable of being destroyed.” Why does Descartes not add a truth condition, thereby ensuring that beliefs counting as perfect knowledge are true? In an influential 1970 book, Harry Frankfurt offers a provocative answer. He argues that Descartes’ goal, truth-wise, is to establish the consistency of our beliefs, but not their correspondence with an external reality. Writes Frankfurt: Frankfurt thinks that Descartes’ novel plan involves arguing that our best rational efforts show that our best rational efforts are logically consistent: it is “an attempt to show that there are no good reasons for believing that reason is unreliable – that the mistrust of reason is not supported by reason and that it is accordingly irrational” (1970, 175). Frankfurt adds that “the conception of truth involved in [Descartes’] question about the truth of what is clearly and distinctly perceived is, in other words, a conception of coherence rather than of correspondence” (1970, 170). Frankfurt’s coherentist interpretation is at odds with a number of textual and doctrinal considerations. Descartes writes to Mersenne that “the word ‘truth’, in the strict sense, denotes the conformity of thought with its object” (16 Oct 1639, AT 2:597, CSMK 139). The suggestion here is of some version of a correspondence theory. Also, on the most straightforward reading of the epistemic moves in the Meditations, Descartes is presupposing that at least some truths involve extramental metaphysical relations. Consider that Evil Genius Doubt is, fundamentally, a worry not about whether our various clear and distinct judgments cohere, but about whether they accurately represent an extramental reality – i.e., a doubt about “whether things do in reality correspond to our perception of them” (Replies 4, AT 7:226, CSM 2:159). Interestingly, Frankfurt himself came to renounce the interpretation: How then should we interpret the Second Replies passage, and how should we understand the absence of a truth condition? I suggest that the lack of a truth condition need not reflect an indifference about truth, as opposed to a view about how a concern for truth is properly expressed in an account of knowledge. We can understand Descartes as wanting a fully internalist account whereby all conditions of knowledge are accessible to the would-be knower. Putting the point another way, if the question of whether the conditions of knowledge had been met were answerable only by “God or an angel,” it would impose an unacceptably externalist element on the theory. On a justified belief rendering, his account of perfect knowledge is fully internalist; yet, with the addition of a truth condition, it is not – at least, not given a correspondence theory of truth, in the context of metaphysical realism. Importantly, then, in attributing to Descartes a justified belief account, we need not thereby attribute to him an indifference concerning truth. Rather, we can attribute to him the view that the way properly to express one’s concern for truth is by enforcing high justificatory standards. Again, from that same passage: One possible objection to a justified belief account is expressed by Lennon, who worries that on such accounts the desired cognitive state (indubitability) “could as well be achieved by a pill”; adding that “Descartes would not be satisfied with such a pill because his aim is not just to arrive at certainty, but truth, which he cannot help but think he has achieved” (2008, 167). (Cf. Hatfield 2006, 135, who expresses a related objection.) Granted, if the pill simply prevented me from apprehending any reasons for doubting my beliefs, we’d be loath to regard such beliefs as knowledge. Descartes himself makes a related point in connection with an atheist geometer who happens never to doubt his beliefs, simply because the Evil Genius Doubt never occurs to him: Presumably, Descartes’ point holds whether the doubt simply never occurs to him, or is instead prevented from occurring to him by a pill. But note that the objection is telling only insofar as the requisite indubitability is understood as merely psychological. Yet clear texts indicate that Descartes regards clear and distinct perception as having epistemic import beyond mere doubt-resistance. His use of light metaphors, including the association of clarity and distinctness with the natural light, strongly convey a form of rational insight. In his view, our inability to doubt the matters we clearly and distinctly perceive is not simply a causal result of our cognitive nature; it’s also a rational result of what such perception enables us to understand. Consider a revised version of Lennon’s worry. Imagine that the magic pill is so magical as to instill in us a clear and distinct understanding of the matters we perceive – i.e., assume the pill functions as an alternative cognitive route to clear and distinct perception. In that case, the desired cognitive state is indeed “achieved by a pill.” Yet, it seems Descartes can happily accept the result. Another possible objection is that Descartes’ high justificatory standards generate a de facto truth condition: because having Cartesian certainty entails that one’s beliefs are true, truth is a necessary condition of knowledge. But this objection misses a key point. As suggested in the Second Replies passage, Cartesian certainty – understood in terms of indubitability – does not, strictly speaking, rule out the broad possibility that we are in error. The notions of indubitability and truth are different: that “p is indubitable” entails not that “p is true,” but that “there can be no reasons for doubting p.” Descartes’ final solution to the Evil Genius Doubt entails not that an evil genius cannot be, but that it cannot be coherently conceived. And that it cannot be coherently conceived, thinks Descartes, gives us “everything that we could reasonably want” – not because such coherence is the goal, but because of what it establishes, truth-wise. Further reading: For Descartes’ response to the charges of circularity: see the Fourth Replies. For texts concerning his final solution to hyperbolic doubt: see Fifth Meditation; Second Replies; letter to Regius (24 May 1640). For a treatment of the Fourth Meditation proof of the C&D Rule, see Newman (1999). For discussions of the role of the Fifth Meditation in the eventual, self-evident apprehension of God, see Newman and Nelson (1999), Nolan (2005), and Nolan and Nelson (2006). For examples of unbounded doubt interpretations, see Carriero (2009), Curley (1978 and 1993), DeRose (1992), Loeb (1992), Newman (2012), Newman and Nelson (1999), Sosa (1997a and 1997b), and Van Cleve (1979). For examples of bounded doubt interpretations, see Broughton (2002), Doney (1955), Della Rocca (2005), Kenny (1968), Morris (1973), Rickless (2005), and Wilson (1978). For alternative schemes for cataloguing interpretations, see Hatfield (2006) and Newman and Nelson (1999). For an anthology devoted largely to the Cartesian Circle, see Doney (1987). For discussions of the role of truth in perfect knowledge, see Frankfurt (1970 and 1978), Hatfield (2006), Lennon (2008), Loeb (1992), and Newman and Nelson (1999).