 Recall that Descartes characterizes the cogito as an Archimedean point, of sorts, in his constructive efforts at finding something “certain and unshakeable.” It is clear how the cogito serves this role on interpretations rendering it as immune to the Evil Genius Doubt. In what sense is it an Archimedean point on interpretations rendering it vulnerable to doubt? Insofar as the cogito is the first cognition noticed to resist any efforts at a direct doubt, it can be said to play an Archimedean role. For it exemplifies the kind of cognitions Descartes employs in his constructive efforts, arguing for a solution to the sceptical problem. Descartes indeed uses the cogito to clarify the epistemically privileged status of clear and distinct perception, even formulating clarity and distinctness as underwriting a general rule for discovering truth. The passage occurs in the second paragraph of the Third Meditation: I shall refer to this general rule the ‘C&D Rule’. Though interpretations differ, the context of the passage indicates the rule is treated as provisional – i.e., further work will be needed before the rule can be regarded as finally established. On two counts, the announcement of the rule is carefully tinged with caution, in anticipation of the revelation to come (two paragraphs later) that even clearly and distinctly perceived matters are vulnerable to the Evil Genius Doubt. First, the passage notes that being clearly and distinctly perceived “would not be enough to make me certain of the truth of the matter,” if the truth of such matters could be undermined. Second, the announcement includes an important qualification, in saying that it does “now seem” (videor) that this is a justified rule. Because it soon emerges that the Evil Genius Doubt undermines the veracity of the rule, Descartes assumes the burden of trying to establish the rule – a proof he takes to occur not in this early Third Meditation passage, but only later, after having argued for an all-perfect God: “in the Fourth Meditation it is proved that everything that we clearly and distinctly perceive is true” (Synopsis, AT 7:15, CSM 2:11).  (Section 5.3  discusses Descartes’ Fourth Meditation argument for the C&D Rule.) If even clear and distinct perception is subject to doubt, how is the meditator to make progress? How can he construct arguments in the effort to solve the sceptical problem? This brings into focus the issue of whether Descartes’ procedure is viciously circular. For it seems that in the very process of arguing for a truth rule, Descartes is already employing that very rule. For now, we’ll set side this issue of circularity (returning to it in  Section 6). In his strategy for making constructive arguments, Descartes builds on the fact that clearly and distinctly perceived matters appear to us to be utterly telling, i.e., while our perception is clear and distinct. So, by employing none other than premises and reasoning that are clearly and distinctly perceived, we can make rational progress – this, notwithstanding that those very same proofs fall vulnerable to indirect doubt, once our attention is no longer clear and distinct. The following Fifth Meditation passage illustrates the point: Of course, Descartes will need some sort of final solution to the problem of ongoing indirect doubt. In the meantime, he has his meditator attempting to move forward, constructing anti-sceptical arguments. The broader argumentative strategy is revealed at the end of the pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation: “in order to remove even this slight reason for doubt, as soon as the opportunity arises I must examine whether there is a God, and, if there is, whether he can be a deceiver.” So, in the effort to establish the C&D Rule, the meditator makes arguments to the conclusion that his creator is not an evil genius, but an all-perfect creator who would not allow him to be deceived about what he clearly and distinctly perceives. The broader argument unfolds in two main steps. The first main step involves Third Meditation arguments for the existence of of an all-perfect God. From these arguments the meditator concludes: There is much of interest in Descartes’ Third Meditation arguments for an all-perfect creator God. (Note that the Fifth Meditation advances a further argument for God.) In the interests of space, and of focusing on epistemological concerns, however, these arguments will not be considered here. (For an overview of Descartes’ proofs, see Nolan (2014) and Nolan and Nelson (2006).) The second main step involves an argument from the premise (now established) that an all-perfect God exists, to the general veracity of the C&D Rule – whereby, whatever is clearly and distinctly perceived is guaranteed to be true. It is this second main step of the broader argument to which we now turn. It might seem that a separate argument for the C&D Rule is unneeded – that having demonstrated a non-deceiving God, the veracity of the rule is a straightforward consequence. But this is too fast. Why should only the C&D Rule be a straightforward consequence, but not also a more general infallibility of all our judgments? Essentially this point is made in the First Meditation, at the introduction of the Evil Genius Doubt. As we saw, the meditator there observes that what seems to follow from the standard view – whereby God “is said to be supremely good,” rather than a deceiver – is that God would not allow us ever to be mistaken in our judgments: In short, the most straightforward consequence of an all-perfect creator would seem to be the universal rule: If I form a judgment, then it is true. Yet quite clearly, this rule doesn’t hold. What emerges is an instance of the problem of evil, here applied to judgment error. As the passage reasons: These First Meditation remarks set the stage for the discussion that comes in the Fourth Meditation. Descartes needs a theodicy for error – theodicy being an effort to explain how God is compatible with evil. The theodicy needs to show that the existence of an all-perfect God is compatible with some forms of judgment error, but not others; somehow, God allows error in our sensory judgments, while guaranteeing the inerrancy of judgments based on clear and distinct perception. In contrast with the First Meditation setting, the context of the Fourth Meditation comes on the heels of a demonstration of the existence of an all-perfect God. The argument of the Fourth Meditation thus begins by reviewing the problem where the First Meditation left it, but in the light of the meditator’s newfound conclusion – “to begin with, I recognize that it is impossible that God should ever deceive me.” The passage continues: Seeking to resolve the problem, the meditator investigates the causes of error. In the course of the discussion, Descartes puts forward his theory whereby judgment arises from the cooperation of the intellect and the will: the role of the intellect is to consider a perceptual content – i.e., something seeming to be the case, thereby functioning as a possible judgment; the role of the will is to give assent (or dissent), or withhold assent, to the perceptual content under consideration. The investigation concludes that the blameworthy cause of error lies in our improper use of our will. Neither the intellect nor the will is inherently defective (though each is, of course, finite), nor is there inherent defect in the design of how they cooperate – i.e., their design does not render error inevitable. The design does make for the possibility of error, in that “the scope of the will is wider than that of the intellect”: my will is able to assent to more kinds of matters than just those that I clearly and distinctly understand; “but instead of restricting it within the same limits, I extend its use to matters which I do not understand” (AT 7:58, CSM 2:40). In short, actual mistakes of judgment arise from user error: The theodicy that emerges is a version of the freewill defense. Accordingly, we should thank God for giving us freewill, but the cost of having freewill is the possibility of misusing it. Since error is the result of misusing our freewill, we should not blame God. Not only is the theodicy used to explain the kinds of error God can allow, it serves to clarify the kinds of error God cannot allow. From the latter arises a proof of the C&D Rule. God can allow errors that are my fault, but not errors that would be God’s fault. On occasions when my perception is clear and distinct, my assent is involuntary and thus not a result of a misuse of my freewill. In such cases, assent is a necessary consequence of my cognitive nature – a point made in many passages, as we’ve seen: “our mind is of such a nature that it cannot help assenting to what it clearly understands” (AT 3:64, CSMK 147). Since, on occasions of clarity and distinctness, my assent is the unavoidable consequence of my God-given cognitive nature, God would properly get the blame if those judgments resulted in error. Therefore, they are not in error; indeed they could not be. That an evil genius might have created me casts doubt on my clear and distinct judgments. That, instead, an all-perfect God created me guarantees that these judgments are true. A clever strategy of argument thus unfolds – effectively inverting the usual reasoning in the problem of evil: The first premise is argued in the Third Meditation. The second premise arises from the discussion of the Fourth Meditation. The result is a divine guarantee of the C&D Rule. Whatever I perceive clearly and distinctly is guaranteed true, because I am the creature of an all-perfect God. The broader case to overcome radical doubt is not yet complete. The meditator is now in position to reproduce a demonstration – each step of which he clearly and distinctly perceives – supporting the grand conclusion that he’s the creation of an all-perfect God who would not allow him to be mistaken about whatever he perceives clearly and distinctly. However, when he’s no longer clearly and distinctly perceiving the steps of the demonstration, the grand conclusion is vulnerable to the lingering Evil Genius Doubt. It seems that perfect knowledge is not yet within his grasp. Moreover, the demonstration itself looks suspiciously circular – the so-called Cartesian Circle (a problem to which we now turn). Further reading: On discussions of truth criteria in the 16th and 17th centuries, see Popkin (1979). On the dubitability of clear and distinct perception (including the cogito), see Carriero (2009, 339ff), Newman and Nelson (1999).