 It is not at all clear that all of the examples that double effect has been invoked to justify can be explained by a single principle. There may in fact be a variety of considerations that bear on the permissibility of causing unintended harm. Proponents of the principle of double effect have always acknowledged that a proportionality condition must be satisfied when double effect is applied, but this condition typically requires only that the good effect outweigh the foreseen bad effect or that there be sufficient reason for causing the bad effect. Some critics of the principle of double effect have maintained that when double effect has been invoked, substantive independent justifications for causing the kind of harm in question are implicitly relied upon, and are in fact, doing all of the justificatory work. These independent considerations are not derived from the distinction between intended and merely foreseen consequences and do not depend on it (Davis (1984), McIntyre (2001)). If this criticism is correct, then perhaps the cases that have traditionally been cited as applications of the principle of double effect are united only by the fact that each is an exception to the general prohibition on causing the death of a human being. The historical origins of the principle of double effect as a tenet of Catholic casuistry might provide a similar explanation for the unity of its applications. If one were to assume that it is absolutely prohibited to cause the death of a human being, then it would not be permissible to kill an aggressor in self-defense, to sacrifice one’s life to protect others, to hasten death as a side effect of administering sedation for intractable pain, or to endanger non-combatants in warfare. If one were to assume instead that what is absolutely prohibited is to cause the death of a human being intentionally, then these cases can be viewed as cases of non-intentional killing. Controversy about the principle of double effect concerns whether a unified justification for these cases of non-intentional killing can be provided and if so, whether that justification depends on the distinction between intended and merely foreseen consequences. In an essay that develops Warren Quinn’s view that Double Effect is best understood as resting on a distinction between direct and indirect agency, Dana Nelkin and Samuel Rickless (2014) formulate the principle in this way: “In cases in which harm must come to some in order to achieve a good (and is the least costly of possible harms necessary), the agent foresees the harm, and all other things are equal, a stronger case is needed to justify harmful direct agency than to justify equally harmful indirect agency” (2014). In harmful indirect agency, harm comes to some victims in order to achieve a good, but “nothing in that way is intended for the victims, or what is so intended does not contribute to their harm.” In harmful direct agency “harm comes to some victims, at least in part, from the agent’s deliberately involving them in something in order to further his purpose precisely by way of their being so involved” (Nelkin and Rickless (2014), quoting Quinn (1989)). This way of characterizing harmful direct agency and harmful indirect agency could be thought of as two possible dimensions of agency in which harm is not intended, rather than as a contrast within a single dimension of agency. This view would be supported if it turns out that some complex plans of action count as both harmful direct agency and harmful indirect agency. For example, consider the deliberations of public health officials who propose to put in place a vaccination program in their region in order to protect citizens from a rapidly spreading, highly contagious, and invariably lethal disease. They foresee that if the program is carried out, about one in ten thousand vaccine recipients will experience adverse effects from the vaccine that will prove fatal, and the officials have no way to identify in advance which vaccine recipients will be susceptible to these adverse effects in order to screen them and exclude them from receiving the vaccine. It might seem that Double Effect is designed to explain why they may proceed with the vaccination program despite these foreseeable, regretted, and unpreventable unintended side effects of promoting a good end: this might seem to be a case of indirect agency. And yet, if the officials’ desire to bring about herd immunity leads them to advocate a widespread program with incentives for participation or even mandatory participation, then it will be true that harm comes to some victims that they have deliberately involved. This would make their actions in promoting the program a case of direct agency. Issues about consent may be relevant here as well: if the vaccine recipients willingly assume the risk of experiencing adverse effects, then a full description of the program must consider their own agency in assessing the information they receive. Examples like these suggest that the cases Double Effect has been taken to apply to may involve many different dimensions of agency rather than a sharp contrast that concerns a single dimension of agency. Critics of the principle of double effect claim that the pattern of justification used in these cases has some shared conditions: the agent acts in order to promote a good end, shows adequate respect for the value of human life in so acting, and has attempted to avoid or minimize the harm in question. However, they maintain that the justification for causing the harm in question depends on further substantive considerations that are not derived from the contrast between intention and foresight or the contrast between direct and indirect agency. Some have developed this kind of criticism by arguing that the appeal of the principle of double effect is, fundamentally, illusory: an agent’s intentions are not relevant to the permissibility of an action in the way that the proponents of the principle of double effect would claim, though an agent’s intentions are relevant to moral assessments of the way in which the agent deliberated (see David McCarthy (2002) and T.M. Scanlon (2008). That an agent intended to bring about a certain harm does not explain why the action was impermissible, but it can explain what is morally faulty about the agent’s reasoning in pursuing that line of action.