 Much of Davidson’s early work was in decision theory (see Decision-Making: An Experimental Approach [1957]), and it was not until the early 1960s that the work for which he is best known began to appear in print. Indeed, Davidson’s first major philosophical publication was the seminal paper ‘Actions, Reasons and Causes’ (1963). In that paper Davidson sets out to defend the view that the explanation of action by reference to reasons (something we do, for instance, when we refer to an agent’s intentions or motives in acting) is also a form of causal explanation. Indeed, he argues that reasons explain actions just inasmuch as they are the causes of those actions. This approach was in clear opposition to the Wittgensteinian orthodoxy of the time. On this latter account causal explanation was viewed as essentially a matter of showing the event to be explained as an instance of some law-like regularity (as we might explain the whistling of a kettle by reference to certain laws involving, among other things, the behaviour of gases under pressure). Since rational explanation was held, in general, not to involve any such reference to laws, but rather required showing how the action fitted into some larger pattern of rational behaviour, explanation by reference to reasons was held to be distinct from and independent of explanation by reference to causes. Although directed against the Wittgensteinian-inspired view that reasons cannot be causes, Davidson’s argument nevertheless effectively redeploys a number of Wittgensteinian notions (see Stoutland 2011, for a sympathetic, but not uncritical, examination of the Davidsonian view of action from a largely Wittgensteinian perspective). Two ideas play an especially significant role in the Davidsonian account – ideas that are also, in one form or another, important in Davidson’s thinking elsewhere. The first of these ideas is the notion of a ‘primary reason’ – the pairing of a belief and a desire (or ‘pro-attitude’) in the light of which an action is explained. Thus, my action of flipping the light switch can be explained by reference to my having the belief that flipping the switch turns on the light in combination with my having the desire to turn on the light (for most explanations explicit reference to both the belief and the desire is unnecessary). An action is thus rendered intelligible through being embedded in a broader system of attitudes attributable to the agent – through being embedded, that is, in a broader framework of rationality. The second idea is that of action ‘under a description’ (a phrase originally appearing in G. E. M. Anscombe’s Intention, published in 1959). As with the concept of a primary reason the idea here is simple enough: one and the same action is always amenable to more than one correct description. This idea is especially important, however, as it provides a means by which the same item of behaviour can be understood as intentional under some descriptions but not under others. Thus my action of flipping the light switch can be redescribed as the act of turning on the light (under which it is intentional) and also as the act of alerting the prowler who, unbeknown to me, is lurking in the bushes outside (under which it is unintentional). Generalising this point we can say that the same event can be referred to under quite disparate descriptions: the event of alerting the prowler is the same event as my flipping the light switch which is the same event as my moving of my body (or a part of my body) in a certain way. Davidson treats the connection between reason and action (where the reason is indeed the reason for the action) as a connection that obtains between two events (the agent’s believing and desiring on the one hand and her acting on the other) that can be variously described. The connection is both rational, inasmuch as the belief-desire pair (the ‘primary reason’) specifies the reason for the action, but it is also causal, inasmuch as the one event causes the other if it is indeed the reason for it. It is precisely because the reason is causally related to the action that the action can be explained by reference to the reason. Indeed, where an agent has a number of reasons for acting, and yet acts on the basis of one reason in particular, there is no way to pick out just that reason on which the agent acts other than by saying that it is the reason that caused her action. Understood as rational the connection between reason and action cannot be described in terms of any strict law. Yet inasmuch as the connection is also a causal connection, so there must exist some law-like regularity, though not describable in the language of rationality, under which the events in question fall (an explanation can be causal, then, even though it does not specify any strict law). Davidson is thus able to maintain that rational explanation need not involve explicit reference to any law-like regularity, while nevertheless also holding that there must be some such regularity that underlies the rational connection just inasmuch as it is causal. Moreover, since Davidson resists the idea that rational explanations can be formulated in the terms of a predictive science, so he seems committed to denying that there can be any reduction of rational to non-rational explanation. The more developed argument for this latter claim, and for the more general position in the philosophy of mind, of which it forms a part, appears at a number of places in Davidson’s work. The first and best-known presentation is that of ‘Mental Events’ (1970b) in which Davidson argues for the compatibility of three principles (all three of which are adumbrated in various ways in the argument of ‘Actions, Reasons and Causes’): (i) that at least some mental events interact causally with physical events – The Principle of Causal Interaction; (ii) that events related as cause and effect fall under strict laws (that is, laws that are ‘precise, explicit and as exceptionless as possible’) – The Principle of the Nomological Character of Causality; and (iii) that there are no strict laws (as opposed to mere generalisations) relating mental and physical events – The Anomalism of the Mental. Of these principles the first two would ordinarily be held to be incompatible with the third, and to imply, not the ‘anomalism’ of the mental, but rather, in the case of mental and physical events related as cause and effect, the existence of strict laws relating those events. To argue, as does Davidson, for the compatibility of the original principles is thus also to argue for the truth of the third, that is, for the truth of anomalous monism. Davidson holds that events are particulars such that the same event can be referred to under more than one description. He also holds that events that are causally related must be related under some strict law. However, since Davidson takes laws to be linguistic entities, so they can relate events only as those events are given under specific descriptions. Thus, as was already evident in Davidson’s approach to the theory of action, the same pair of events may instantiate a law under one description, but not under others. There is, for example, no strict law that relates, under just those descriptions, the formation of ice on the surface of a road to the skidding of a car on that road, and yet, under a different description (a description that will employ a completely different set of concepts), the events at issue will indeed be covered by some strict law or set of laws. But while nomological relations between events (relations involving laws) depend on the descriptions under which the events are given, relations of causality and identity obtain irrespective of descriptions – if the icing-up of the road did indeed cause the skid, then it did so no matter how the events at issue are described. (The form of description – whether mental or physical – is thus irrelevant to the fact that a particular causal relation obtains). It follows that the same pair of events may be related causally, and yet, under certain descriptions (though not under all), there be no strict law under which those events fall. In particular, it is possible that a mental event – an event given under some mental description – will be causally related to some physical event – an event given under a physical description – and yet there will be no strict law covering those events under just those descriptions. My wanting to read Tolstoy, for instance, leads me to take War and Peace from the shelf, and so my wanting causes a change in the physical arrangement of a certain region of space-time, but there is no strict law that relates my wanting to the physical change. Similarly, while any mental event will be identical with some physical event – it will indeed be one and the same event under two descriptions – it is possible that there will be no strict law relating the event as described in mentalistic terms with the event as physically described. In fact, Davidson is explicit in claiming that there can be no strict laws that relate the mental and the physical in this way – there is no strict law that relates, for instance, wanting to read with a particular kind of brain activity. Davidson’s denial of the existence of any strict ‘psycho-physical’ laws follows from his view of the mental as constrained by quite general principles of rationality that do not apply, at least not in the same way, to physical descriptions: normative considerations of overall consistency and coherence, for instance, constrain our own thinking about events as physically described, but they have no purchase on physical events as such. This does not mean, of course, that there are no correlations whatsoever to be discerned between the mental and the physical, but it does mean that the correlations that can be discerned cannot be rendered in the precise, explicit and exceptionless form – in the form, that is, of strict laws – that would be required in order to achieve any reduction of mental to physical descriptions. The lack of strict laws covering events under mental descriptions is thus an insuperable barrier to any attempt to bring the mental within the framework of unified physical science. However, while the mental is not reducible to the physical, every mental event can be paired with some physical event – that is, every mental description of an event can be paired with a physical description of the very same event. This leads Davidson to speak of the mental as ‘supervening’ on the physical in a way that implies a certain dependence of mental predicates on physical predicates: predicate p supervenes on a set of predicates S ‘if and only if p does not distinguish any entities that cannot be distinguished by S’ (see ‘Thinking Causes’ [1993]). Put more simply, events that cannot be distinguished under some physical description cannot be distinguished under a mental description either. On the face of it, anomalous monism appears a highly attractive way to think about the relation between the mental and the physical – inasmuch as it combines ‘monism’ with ‘anomalism’ so it seems to preserve what is important about physicalism while nevertheless retaining the ordinary language of so-called ‘folk-psychology’ (the language of beliefs and desires, actions and reasons). In fact anomalous monism has proved to be a highly contentious position drawing criticism from both physicalists and non-physicalists alike. The nomological conception of causality (the second of the three principles defended in ‘Mental Events’) has often been seen as something for which Davidson fails to supply any real argument (a criticism he has attempted to address in ‘Laws and Cause’ [1995]); the Davidsonian account of supervenience has been viewed as incompatible with other aspects of his position and sometimes as simply mistaken or confused; and, perhaps the most serious and widespread criticism, anomalous monism has been seen as making the mental causally inert. These criticisms have not, however, gone unanswered (see especially ‘Thinking Causes’), and although Davidson modified aspects of his position over the years, he continued to hold to, and to defend, the basic theses first made explicit in ‘Mental Events’. Davidson’s commitment to the rationality of the mental as one of the cornerstones of anomalous monism (as well as to the account of ‘radical interpretation’ [see ‘Meaning and Truth’ below]) led him to take a special interest in the problem of apparently irrational belief and action – something first addressed in ‘How is Weakness of the Will Possible?’(1970a). While Davidson treats irrationality as a real feature of our mental lives, he offers a way of dealing with it that aims at preserving, in some sense, the overall rationality of the mind (see especially ‘Two Paradoxes of Irrationality’ [1982b]). A belief or desire in the mind of one person can cause a belief or desire in the mind of another without this compromising the rationality of the mental. (Davidson’s example is my growing of a beautiful flower because I desire you to enter my garden – you develop a craving to see the flower as a result of my desire and my desire has thereby caused, without being a reason for, your craving). Davidson suggests that we should view the same sort of relation as sometimes holding within a single mind. To this end we should view the mind as weakly ‘partitioned’ so that different attitudes may be located within different ‘territories’ and need not, therefore, be taken to come into direct conflict. Davidson’s thinking about irrationality was increasingly influenced by an engagement with psychoanalytic thinking. Marcia Cavell, Davidson’s third wife, had strong psychoanalytic interests, and in The Psychoanalytic Mind (Cavell 1993), she connects Davidson’s thought directly with that of Freud. Davidson’s accounts of action and of mind call upon a well-developed set of analyses concerning psychological concepts such as belief, desire and intention – concepts whose analysis is taken further in a number of papers that follow on from, and develop or modify, the ideas first set out in ‘Actions, Reasons and Causes’ (papers such as ‘Agency’ (1971) and ‘Intending’ [1978a]) as well as in Davidson’s discussions of epistemological and semantic issues (see below). But Davidson ‘s work in this area is also dependent on his account of the notions of cause, event and law and, in particular, on his defence of the view that events are particulars and so constitute a fundamental ontological category. If events are indeed particulars then an important question concerns the conditions of identity for events. In ‘The Individuation of Events’ [1969a] Davidson argues that events are identical if and only if they have exactly the same causes and effects. In ‘Reply to Quine on Events’ [1985b] he abandons this criterion in favour of the Quinean suggestion that events are identical if and only if they occupy exactly the same location in space and time. A characteristic feature of Davidson’s approach to such ontological questions has been to focus on the logical structure of sentences about the entities at issue rather than on those entities as such. Davidson’s approach to events, for instance, is grounded in an analysis of the underlying logical form of sentences about events; in the case of causal relations, in an analysis of the logical form of sentences that express such relations (see ‘Causal Relations’ [1967a]); and in his approach to action also, Davidson’s approach involves an analysis of the logical form of sentences about actions (see ‘The Logical Form of Action Sentences’ [1967b]). This reflects a more general commitment on Davidson’s part to the inseparability of questions of ontology from questions of logic. This commitment is spelt out explicitly in ‘The Method of Truth in Metaphysics’ (1977) and it provides a further point of connection between Davidson’s work in the philosophy of action, event and mind and his work on questions of meaning and language.