 Another debate that arises out of externalism concerns the legitimacy of wide contents in causal explanations. Most philosophers agree with Davidson (1980) that beliefs and desires play an important role in the causal explanation of actions. However, it is not clear how this can be reconciled with externalism. The problem comes up because it has been suggested that causal explanations of behavior should appeal only to the intrinsic properties of our bodies, properties that describe what is happening here and now within us (Stich (1983)). But externalism says that mental contents are determined by causal, social or historical factors, factors which extend spatially and temporally beyond the body. So this seems to imply that wide mental contents cannot be causally relevant because of their relational nature. There are two main strategies to show that wide mental contents can legitimately enter into causal explanations. The first strategy is to argue that the causal efficacy of a mental state with wide content derives from the causal efficacy of a corresponding internal state. To use a non-mental example, we often say that a mosquito bite causes swelling, even though being a mosquito bite is a relational property. Nonetheless, one might try to justify the causal claim on the basis that the mosquito bite corresponds to the presence of certain chemicals that lead to the swelling. Similarly, one might argue that mental states with wide contents are causally relevant because it is possible to carve off some internal component that causes behavior. However, one worry with this approach is why it doesn't show that wide contents are not causally relevant after all, because it is the internal component that is doing all the causal work. A different objection from Williamson (2000) is that states with wide contents are “prime” and cannot be factored into an external and internal component. A different way to defend the explanatory relevance of wide content is to identify its distinctive explanatory role without them being parasitic upon the causal efficacy of intrinsic properties. For example, according to Dretske (1988), when my intention to drink water causes me to raise my glass, the behavior that is the object of the causal explanation is not a single event, but a complex process where an internal state causes some bodily movement. Dretske argues that the wide contents of my intention plays a causal role because it provides a structural explanation of how the internal brain state comes to be recruited to cause the bodily movement. Williamson (2000) offers a different account of the explanatory role of wide contents. He thinks they provide us with a better understanding of the connection between the mental states of an agent and his actions in the non-immediate future, because our actions typically involve complex interactions with the environment. For further discussion, see Peacocke (1993), Jackson (1996), Yablo (1997, 2003), and the entry on  mental causation.