 In the previous section, we examined the case for the psychological reality of mental simulation. We now turn to ST as a theory of mindreading. We will tackle two main issues: the extent to which mindreading is simulation-based, and how simulation-based mindreading works. ST proposes that mental simulation plays a central role in mindreading, i.e., it plays a central role in the capacity to represent and reason about others’ mental state. What does “central” mean here? Does it mean the central role, with other contributors to mindreading being merely peripheral? This is an important question, since in recent years there have been proposed hybrid models according to which both mental simulation and theorizing play important roles in mindreading (see  section 5.2). A possible interpretation of the claim that mental simulation plays a central role in representing others’ mental states is that mindreading events are always simulation-based, even if they sometimes also involve theory. Some Simulation Theorists, however, reject this interpretation, since they maintain that there are mindreading events in which mental simulation plays no role at all (Currie & Ravenscroft 2002). For example, if I know that Little Jimmy is happy every time he finds a dollar, and I also know that he has just found a dollar, I do not need to undergo any simulation process to conclude that Little Jimmy is happy right now. I just need to carry out a simple logical inference. However, generalizations like, “Little Jimmy is happy every time he finds a dollar,” are ceteris paribus rules. People readily recognize exceptions: for example, we recognize situations in which Jimmy would probably not be happy even if he found a dollar, including some in which finding a dollar might actually make him unhappy. Rather than applying some additional or more complex rules that cover such situations, it is arguable that putting ourselves in Jimmy's situation and using “good common sense” alerts us to to these exceptions and overrides the rule. If that is correct, then simulation is acting as an overseer or governor even when people appear to be simply applying rules. Goldman (2006) suggests that we cash out the central role of mental simulation in representing others’ mental states as follows: mindreading is often simulation-based. Goldman’s suggestion, however, turns out to be empty, since he explicitly refuses to specify what “often” means in this context. How often is often? Every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday? Precisely what claim does ST mean to make? It is unreasonable to demand a precise answer at this time. (Goldman 2006: 42; see also Goldman 2002; Jeannerod & Pacherie 2004) Perhaps a better way to go is to characterize the centrality of mental simulation for mindreading not in terms of frequency of use, but in terms of importance. Currie and Ravenscroft make the very plausible suggestion that “one way to see how important a faculty is for performing a certain task is to examine what happens when the faculty is lacking or damaged” (Currie & Ravenscroft 2002: 51). On this basis, one could say that mental simulation plays a central role in mindreading if and only if: if one’s simulational capacity (i.e., the capacity to undergo simulation processes/simulated mental states) were impaired, then one’s mindreading capacity would be significantly impaired. An elaboration of this line of thought comes from Gordon (2005)— see also Gordon (1986, 1996) and Peacocke (2005)—who argues that someone lacking the capacity for mental simulation would not be able to represent mental states as such, since she is incapable of representing anyone as having a mind in the first place. Gordon’s argument is essentially as follows: We represent something as having a mind, as having mental states and processes, only if we represent it as a subject (“subject of experience,” in formulations of “the hard problem of consciousness”), where “a subject” is understood as a generic “I”. This distinguishes it from a “mere object” (and also is a necessary condition for a more benevolent sort of empathy). To represent something as another “I” is to represent it as a possible target of self-projection: as something one might (with varying degrees of success) imaginatively put oneself in the place of. (Of course, one can fancifully put oneself in the place of just about anything—a suspension bridge, even; but that is not a reductio ad absurdum, because one can also fancifully represent just about anything as having a mind.) It is not clear, however, what consequences Gordon’s conceptual argument would have for mindreading, if any. Even if a capacity to self-project were needed for representing mental states as such, would lack of this capacity necessarily impair mindreading? That is, couldn't one predict explain, predict, and coordinate behavior using a theory of internal states, without conceptualizing these as states of an I or subject? As a more general point, Simulation Theorists have never provided a principled account of what would constitute a “significant impairment” of mindreading capacity. To cut a long story short, ST claims that mental simulation plays a central role in mindreading, but at the present stage its proponents do not agree on what this centrality exactly amounts to. We will come back to this issue in  section 5,  when we shall discuss the respective contributions of mental simulation and theorizing in mindreading. We now turn to a different problem: how does mental simulation contribute to mindreading when it does? That is, how does simulation-based mindreading work? Here again, Simulation Theorists disagree about what the right answer is. In what follows, we explore some dimensions of disagreement. Some Simulation Theorists defend a strong view of simulation-based mindreading (Gordon 1986, 1995, 1996; Gallese et al. 2004; Gallese & Sinigaglia 2011). They maintain that many simulation-based mindreading events are (entirely) constituted by mental simulation events (where mental simulation events are simulated mental states or simulation processes). In other words, some Simulation Theorists claim that, on many occasions, the fact that a subject S is representing someone else’s mental states is nothing over and above the fact that S is undergoing a mental simulation event: the former fact reduces to the latter. For example, Lisa’s undergoing a mirrored disgust experience as a result of observing John’s disgusted face would count as a mindreading event: Lisa’s simulated mental state would represent John’s disgust (Gallese et al. 2004). Let us call this “the Constitution View”. We shall elaborate on the details of the Constitution View in  section 4.3.  Before doing that, we consider an argument that has been directed against it over and over again, and which is supposed to show that the Constitution View is a non-starter (Fuller 1995; Heal 1995; Goldman 2008b; Jacob 2008, 2012). Lacking a better name, we will call it “the Anti-Constitution argument”. Here it is. By definition, a mindreading event is a mental event in which a subject, S, represents another subject, Q, as having a certain mental state M. Now—the argument continues—the only way in which S can represent Q as having M is this: S has to employ the concept of that mental state and form the judgment, or the belief, that Q is in M. Therefore, a mindreading event is identical to an event of judging that someone else has a certain mental state (where this entails the application of mentalistic concepts). It follows from this that mental simulation events cannot be constitutive of mindreading events, since the former events are not events of judging that someone else has a certain mental state. An example should clarify the matter. Consider Lisa again, who is undergoing a mirrored disgust experience as a result of observing John’s disgusted face. Clearly, undergoing such a simulated disgust experience is a different mental event from judging that John is experiencing disgust. Therefore, Lisa’s mental simulation does not constitute a mindreading event. In  section 4.3,  we will discuss how the defenders of the Constitution View have responded to this argument. Suppose for the moment that the Anti-Constitution argument is sound. What alternative pictures of simulation-based mindreading are available? Those Simulation Theorists who reject the Constitution View tend to endorse the Causation View, according to which mental simulation events never constitute mindreading events, but only causally contribute to them. The best developed version of this view is Goldman’s (2006) Three-Stage Model (again, this is our label, not his), whose basic structure is as follows: STAGE 1. Mental simulation: Subject S undergoes a simulation process, which outputs a token simulated mental state m*. STAGE 2. Introspection: S introspects m* and categorizes/conceptualizes it as (a state of type) M. STAGE 3. Judgment: S attributes (a state of type) M to another subject, Q, through the judgment Q is in M. (The causal relations among these stages are such that: STAGE 1 causes STAGE 2, and STAGE 2 in turn causes STAGE 3. See Spaulding 2012 for a discussion of the notion of causation in this context.) Here is our trite example. On the basis of observing John’s disgusted facial expression, Lisa comes to judge that John is having a disgust experience. How did she arrive at the formation of this judgment? Goldman’s answer is as follows. The observation of John’s disgusted facial expression triggered a disgust mirroring process in Lisa, resulting in Lisa’s undergoing a mirrored disgust experience (STAGE 1). This caused Lisa to introspect her simulated disgust experience and to categorize it as a disgust experience (STAGE 2) (the technical notion of introspection used by Goldman will be discussed in  section 4.4).  This, in turn, brought about the formation of the judgment John is having a disgust experience (STAGE 3). Given that, according to Goldman, mindreading events are identical to events of judging that someone else has a certain mental state, it is only this last stage of Lisa’s cognitive process that constitutes a mindreading event. On the other hand, the previous two stages were merely causal contributors to it. But mental simulation entirely took place at STAGE 1. This is why the Three-Stage Model is a version of the Causation View: according to the model, mental simulation events causally contribute to, but do not constitute, mindreading events. The main strategy adopted by the advocates of the Constitution View in responding to the Anti-Constitution argument consists in impugning the identification of mindreading events with events of judging that someone else has a certain mental state. A prominent version of this position is Gordon’s (1995, 1996) Radical Simulationism, according to which representing someone else’s mental states does not require the formation of judgments involving the application of mentalistic concepts. Rather, Gordon proposes that the main bulk of mindreading events are non-conceptual representations of others’ mental states, where these non-conceptual representations are constituted by mental simulation events. If this is true, many mindreading events are constituted by mental simulation events, and thus the Constitution View is correct. The following case should help to get Radical Simulationism across. Suppose that I want to represent the mental state that an individual—call him “Mr Tees”—is in right now. According to Gordon, there is a false assumption behind the idea that, in order to do so, I need to form a judgment with the content Mr Tees is in M (where “M” is a placeholder for a mentalistic concept). The false assumption is that the only thing that I can do is to simulate myself in Mr Tees’s situation. As Gordon points out, it is also possible for me to simulate Mr Tees in his situation. And if I do so, my very simulation of Mr Tees constitutes a representation of his mental state, without the need of forming any judgment. This is how Gordon makes his point: To simulate Mr Tees in his situation requires an egocentric shift, a recentering of my egocentric map on Mr Tees. He becomes in my imagination the referent of the first person pronoun “I”. … Such recentering is the prelude to transforming myself in imagination into Mr Tees as much as actors become the characters they play. … But once a personal transformation has been accomplished, … I am already representing him as being in a certain state of mind. (Gordon 1995: 55–56) It is important to stress the dramatic difference between Gordon’s Radical Simulationism and Goldman’s Three-Stage Model. According to the latter, mental simulation events causally contribute to representing other people’s mental states, but the mindreading event proper is always constituted by a judgment (or a belief). Moreover, Goldman maintains that the ability to form such judgments requires both the capacity to introspect one’s own mental states (more in this in  section 4.4)  and possession of mentalistic concepts. None of this is true of Radical Simulationism. Rather, Gordon proposes that, in the large majority of cases, it is the very mental simulation event itself that constitutes a representation of someone else’s mental states. Furthermore, since such mental simulation events neither require the capacity for introspection nor possession of mentalistic concepts, Radical Simulationism entails the surprising conclusion that these two features play at best a very minor role in mindreading. A testable corollary is that social interaction often relies on an understanding of others that does not require the explicit application of mental state concepts. From what we have said so far, one could expect that Gordon should agree with Goldman on at least one point. Clearly, Gordon has to admit that there are some cases of mindreading in which a subject attributes a mental state to someone else through a judgment involving the application of mentalistic concepts. Surely, Gordon cannot deny that there are occasions in which we think things like Mary believes that John is late or Pat desires to visit Lisbon. Being a Simulation Theorist, Gordon will also presumably be eager to maintain that many such mindreading events are based on mental simulation events. But if Gordon admits that much, should he not also concede that Goldman’s Three-Stage Model is the right account of at least those simulation-based mindreading events? Surprising as it may be, Gordon still disagrees. Gordon (1995) accepts that there are occasions in which a subject arrives at a judgment about someone else’s mental state on the basis of some mental simulation event. He might also concede to Goldman that such a judgment involves mentalistic concepts (but see Gordon’s 1995 distinction between comprehending and uncomprehending ascriptions). Contra Goldman, however, Gordon argues that introspection plays no role at all in the generation of these judgments. Focusing on a specific example will help us to clarify this further disagreement between Goldman and Gordon. Suppose that I know that Tom believes that (1) and (2): On this basis, I attribute to Tom the further belief that (3): Goldman’s Three-Stage Model explains this mindreading act in the following way. FIRST STAGE: I imagine believing what Tom believes (i.e., I imagine believing that (1) and (2)); I then feed those belief-like imaginings into my reasoning mechanism (in the off-line mode); as a result, my reasoning mechanism outputs the imagined belief that (3). The SECOND STAGE of the process consists in introspecting this simulated belief and categorizing it as a belief. Crucially, in Goldman’s model, “introspection” does not merely refer to the capacity to self-ascribe mental states. Rather, it picks out a distinctive cognitive method for self-ascription, a method which is typically described as non-inferential and quasi-perceptual (see the section Inner sense accounts in the entry on  self-knowledge).  In particular, Goldman (2006) characterizes introspection as a transduction process that takes the neural properties of a mental state token as input and outputs a categorization of the type of state. In the case that we are considering, my introspective mechanism takes the neural properties of my token simulated belief as input and categorizes it as a belief as output. After all this, the THIRD STAGE occurs: I project the categorized belief onto Tom, through the judgment Tom believes that Fido enjoys watching TV. (You might wonder where the content of Tom’s belief comes from. Goldman (2006) has a story about that too, but we will leave this aside). What about Gordon? How does he explain, in a simulationist fashion but without resorting to introspection, the passage from knowing that Tom believes that (1) and (2) to judging that Tom believes that (3)? According to Gordon, the first step in the process is, of course, imagining to be Tom—thus believing, in the context of the simulation, that (1) and (2). This results (again in the context of the simulation) in the formation of the belief that (3). But how do I now go about discovering that *I*, Tom, believe that (3)? How can one perform such a self-ascription if not via introspection? A suggestion given by Gareth Evans will show us how—Gordon thinks. Evans (1982) famously argued that we answer the question “Do I believe that p?” by answering another question, namely “Is it the case that p?” In other words, according to Evans, we ascribe beliefs to ourselves not by introspecting, or by “looking inside”, but by looking “outside” and trying to ascertain how the world is. If, e.g., I want to know whether I believe that Manchester is bigger than Sheffield, I just ask myself “Is Manchester bigger than Sheffield?” If I answer in the affirmative, then I believe that Manchester is bigger than Sheffield. If I answer in the negative, then I believe that Manchester is not bigger than Sheffield. If I do not know what to answer, then I do not have any belief with regard to this subject matter. Gordon (1986, 1995) maintains that this self-ascription strategy—which he labels “the ascent routine” (Gordon 2007)—is also the strategy that we employ, in the context of a simulation, to determine the mental states of the simulated agent: In a simulation of O, I settle the question of whether O believes that p by simply asking … whether it is the case that p. That is, I simply concern myself with the world—O’s world, the world from O’s perspective. … Reporting O’s beliefs is just reporting what is there. (Gordon 1995: 60) So, this is how, in Gordon’s story, I come to judge that Tom has the belief that Fido enjoys watching TV. In the context of the simulation, *I* asked *myself* (where both “*I*” and “*myself*” in fact refer to Tom) whether *I* believe that Fido enjoys watching TV. And *I* answered this question by answering another question, namely, whether it is the case that Fido enjoys watching TV. Given that, from *my* perspective, Fido enjoys watching TV (after all, from *my* perspective, Fido is a dog and all dogs enjoy watching TV), *I* expressed my belief by saying: “Yes, *I*, Tom, believe that Fido enjoys watching TV”. As you can see, in such a story, introspection does not do anything. (We will come back to the role of introspection in mindreading in  section 6.2). In sections 2, 3, and 4 we dwelt upon the “internal” disagreements among Simulation Theorists. It goes without saying that such disagreements are both wide and deep. In fact, different Simulation Theorists give different answers to such fundamental questions as: “What is mental simulation?”, “How does mental simulation contribute to mindreading?, ‘What is the role of introspection in mindreading?” In light of such differences of opinion in the simulationist camp, one might conclude that, after all, Stich and Nichols (1997) were right when saying that there is no such thing as the Simulation Theory. However, if one considers what is shared among Simulation Theorists, one will realize that there is unity amidst this diversity. A good way to reveal the commonalities among different versions of ST is by contrasting ST with its arch-enemy, i.e., the Theory-Theory of mindreading. This is what we do in the next section.