 Later developments have been primarily in the ‘Hilbertian’ wing of the formalist movement. P. J. Cohen’s work on the generalised continuum hypothesis showed, in tandem with Gödel’s relative consistency proof, that it and countless related set-theoretic propositions concerning the relations of the cardinality of a set to that of its powerset are undecidable by current axioms. With no obvious, non-ad hoc, ways to extend the axioms to decide these questions, this led some mathematicians, such as Cohen himself (Cohen, 1971) and Abraham Robinson, (Robinson, 1965; 1969) to despair of a realistic interpretation of higher set theory. They therefore treat branches of mathematics in which no plausible axiom set will decide the key questions as ‘ideal’ parts of mathematics, lacking the content to be found in other areas. As to game formalism, although philosophers may accuse mathematicians of a tendency to lapse into this seemingly discredited position, very few philosophers advance views resembling the game formalists. Gabbay (2010) and Azzouni (2004; 2005; 2006; 2009) have flown under the formalist flag. Gabbay’s formalism (which he develops only with respect to arithmetic in the paper cited) occupies ‘lush middle ground between traditional formalism, fictionalism, logicism and realism’ (Gabbay, 2010: 219). Moreover he writes ‘Contrary to traditional (game) formalism, my proposal shall not involve an attempt to provide formal derivations of each and every arithmetic truth’ (Gabbay, 2010: 221). Azzouni describes his ‘version of formalism’ (Azzouni, 2004: 105) as one in which ordinary mathematical proofs ‘indicate’ formal derivations. The indication relation is left rather open: Azzouni does not claim that the indicated derivations all belong to a single formal system; rather ordinary proofs can indicate derivations from a ‘family’ of formal derivations. However, the indicated derivations, Azzouni says need not exist; certainly concrete tokens of them need not exist in the same period as the informal proofs which indicate them. Proofs in ancient Greek geometry indicate 21st century or later derivations. They may never, in fact, exist—they may be too long ever to be written down (Azzouni, 2006: 154) though these non-existent proofs are supposed to explain the consensus among mathematicians about which informal proofs are correct! In later work Azzouni seems to retreat from this (or any) brand of formalism: moving to an ‘inference package’ view of mathematical reasoning which does not seem formalist: see again Azzouni (2009). There are, however, another group of contemporary philosophers of mathematics whose views seem close to formalism, namely (some among the) fictionalists. Now the term ‘fictionalist’ can mislead as not all fictionalists assimilate mathematics to fiction. And even if one did, the question would arise: ‘What philosophical account of fiction, and discourse about fiction, does one adopt?’ Many philosophers resile from a realist ontology of fictional characters just as many reject a realist—platonistic—ontology for mathematics. A very simplistic anti-realism about fictionalism might analyse such statements as ‘Oliver Twist was born in London’ as true (or correct) just in case that sentence, or a synonym, occurs in Dickens’s novel (Field, 1989: 3). Even if this worked for fiction, which it pretty clearly does  not,[5]  a parallel approach for mathematics is patently absurd. If a mathematical thesis is proclaimed a theorem, with or without proof, in a journal, be it however respectable then, even if this claim is never challenged and the assertion accepted by the mathematical community this by no means entails that the thesis is true (or correct, if one dislikes applying truth predicates to mathematical sentences). Given the number of “theorems” whose purported proofs were later discovered to be incorrect, we can be pretty sure some falsehoods will wrongly remain accepted for all time as proven. Moreover there will be no end of mathematical claims, some true, some false, which never make it into the mathematical literature at all, never being considered by actual mathematicians. Now the Oliver Twist example is owing to Hartry Field, the founder of the school of fictionalism, if we may term it such. But he qualifies his position as follows: Whether or not this will work for fiction (What if the work is inconsistent: must one use a relevant consequence relation? How can it handle comparisons among different works as in the Tolstoy/Dostoyevsky example above?) this is an interesting position on mathematics with definite formalistic overtones. The mathematician can put forward any (consistent) theory she likes. The truths of the theory are then just the consequences of the theory, there is no need to think that the theory represents an external reality. Fictionalism along these lines has been investigated by Mary Leng (2010). But a key question is: how does one read ‘consequence’? For a formalist, this has to be consequence as derivability. But Leng rejects such a reading: her fictionalism is one in which logical consequence is interpreted not syntactically but modally, with the necessity in question taken as primitive. Hence, this subspecies of fictionalism cannot be classed as formalist. Weir, by contrast, explicitly embraces formalism (1991; 1993; 2010; 2016), moreover formalism in the game formalism tradition. His position, if situated with respect to fictionalism, can be seen as one in which ‘consequence’ is read, in the formalist tradition, syntactically, in terms of formal derivability. As a first approximation, the position is that a mathematical sentence is true if there exists a concrete derivation of a token of it, false if there exists a concrete derivation of a token of its negation. Since truth and falsity conditions make no appeal to abstract proofs, this type of formalism is firmly anti-platonist. This bluntly concretist formalism would seem to face insuperable problems: for example in the shape of the ‘concretely undecidable’, those short theses with unfeasibly long proofs or disproofs mentioned above in connection with Goodman and Quine’s nominalism. Weir’s attempt to address such problems takes as its basis a fairly common ‘post-Fregean’ or ‘neo-Fregean’ perspective on language. Frege, at least early in his career, held that the truth value of a sentence is determined by two factors, the Sinn, the sense, literal meaning or informational content, of the sentence; and the way the world is. Indexicality and wider context relativity of sentences he initially supposed could be met by assuming speakers who uttered and grasped such sentences took them as elliptical for more complete utterances whose sense fixed, in combination with the world, a unique truth value. Later work (including Frege’s own) revealed the inadequacy of this picture, revealed that some indexicality, for instance, is ‘essential’ in John Perry’s phrase, to the thought expressed. I can utter ‘it’s hot now’ truly without knowing where, when or even who (if sufficiently disoriented or out my head) I am. Those who are not utterly sceptical, as radical contextualists are, of systematic theories of meaning, will amend Frege’s view to a tripartite one. A sentence’s truth value, in a particular context, is determined by its informational content, by contextual circumstances related to, ‘fitted to’, the utterance by aspects of the speakers’ practice, and finally by the mind and language-independent world. The contextual circumstances need not figure in the sense or informational content of the utterance; thus a specification of them may include dates and locations, though this is not part of the sense of ‘it’s hot now’ (compare Kaplan’s character versus content distinction, especially the second sense of ‘content’ discussed in his 1989 (fn 28: 503)). This picture in turn suggests the idea that the contextual circumstances which ‘make true’, in conjunction with independent reality, an utterance, may make it true in a non-realist fashion. In Weir’s version of game formalism, the fundamental idea is that what makes true (or false) \(\text{‘}\sin^2\theta +\cos^2\theta = 1\text{’}\) in a particular system is the existence of a concrete proof or refutation, though the statement that such a concrete proof exists is no part of the literal meaning or sense of the claim. The advantage of this type of formalism is that it not only affirms the meaningfulness, the possession of sense, of mathematical utterances; in sharp contrast with traditional game formalism, it holds that such utterances have truth values, where proofs or refutations exist. The problem of the metatheory is met if one can give, after the fashion of Goodman and Quine 1947, a non-mathematical account of concrete proof. Of course, as noted above, severe problems remain. The problem of applicability has to be met, by providing conservative extension proofs for example. And of course the theory is threatened not only by Gödel—type incompleteness and the undecidable—but intuitively truth-valued– sentences it throws up; even more devastating indeterminacy looms in the form of ‘concretely undecidable’ sentences such as Tennant’s primality claim of section 5. One strategy for dealing with these problems is to combine formalism with strict finitism (for one brand of which see Yessinin-Volpin (1961; 1970) and for criticism Dummett (1975): only feasibly long “digestible” tokens—of formulae and of proofs—exist. Formulae with no feasible proofs or disproofs simply lack truth value. Since we know from Gödelian speed-up considerations that for many a provable sentence the shortest derivations of it or its negation are vastly longer than the sentence itself, this finitist/formalism position threatens to cause havoc across large areas of perfectly ordinary mathematics. Weir argues (2010; 2016) that finitist formalism is not only extremely radical, it is incoherent. The reason is the all-pervasive role of abbreviation which generates complex tokens where most of their subparts will never exist, for example abbreviations which create numerals naming (speaking with the platonist) arbitrarily high numbers. As a result, strict finitist specifications cannot be given in the usual inductive fashion, as the intersection of all inductive sets containing the base set and closed under the complexity-forming operations. And this in turn means we cannot prove even very simple facts about wffs and proof. Idealisation, then, is essential in metamathematics, including the idealised notions of truth and proof found in metamathematics. If the formalist is entitled to assert there are infinitely many primes, whilst denying abstract objects exist, there seems no reason why she cannot affirm that there are infinitely many formulae or infinitely many proofs, whilst also denying that abstract objects exist. Weir (2016: 38–39) therefore argues that the formalist can answer the problem of concrete undecidables so long as there are concrete proofs (or proof sketches) of results to the effect that formal truth, for a given language or sub-language, coincides with formal provability, and that there is no reason to restrict idealisation for finitary languages. In conclusion, the formalist who espouses the meaningfulness and indeed truth of standard mathematical theories, including proof theory for example, has more resources to meet such claims than classic game formalism. The question is whether these are enough to salvage a position which it is fair to say most philosophers of mathematics still think hopeless. There is, on the other hand, certainly no universal consensus that formalism is dead and buried and signs of strong sympathy for formalism among some mathematicians and computer scientists.