 As the above (by no means complete) account of his public recognition reveals, in his own day Bradley’s intellectual reputation stood remarkably high: he was widely held to be the greatest English philosopher of his generation, and although the idealists were never a dominant majority, amongst some philosophers the attitude towards him seems to have been one almost of veneration. The significance of his work and its impact upon British philosophy were recognized by friends and foes. The second volume of J.H. Muirhead’s prestigious Contemporary British Philosophy: Personal Statements — a book which appeared shortly after Bradley’s death and collected papers by all major philosophers of the time, including thinkers as hostile to the idealistic outlook as G.E. Moore — opens with the following dedication: ‘To F.H. Bradley, Order of Merit: To whom British Philosophy owed the impulse that gave it new life in our time’. This reputation began to collapse fairly quickly after his death.  The reasons for this are complex, and include matters seemingly extraneous to philosophy itself, such as the reaction against British imperialism (whose moral and spiritual mission had been justified by some idealist philosophers and undertaken by their pupils) following the Great War. One more locally significant factor was the tendentious but still damaging accounts of his views which appeared in the writings of Moore and Russell following their defection from the idealist camp. Russell’s widely read and justly celebrated ‘On Denoting’ provides a wonderful example of philosopical propaganda. Considering the question whether either ‘The King of France is bald’ or ‘The King of France is not bald’ is true or false in the absence of a present King of France, Russell wittily observes that ‘Hegelians’ will conclude that he wears a wig. Russell had a special literary talent for producing remarks of this sort, which could not fail to leave their mark, as there is no worse enemy than a charming irony. At the same time, Russell does not name any specific authors, nor does he address any specific idealist theory. The whole of British Idealism is thus simply dismissed because of its alleged association with Hegel, here ably introduced as the acme of absurdity. Another factor was logical positivism, whose representatives repudiated metaphysics in general as meaningless: in the first chapter of A.J. Ayer’s anti-metaphysical tract Language, Truth and Logic, Bradley is presented solely as a metaphysician and, on the basis of a single out-of-context sentence, selected for ridicule (p. 36). The chosen sentence (“the Absolute enters into, but is itself incapable of, evolution and progress”, which Ayer in fact slightly paraphrased from p. 442 of Appearance and Reality) was Bradley’s expression of the familiar doctrine that ultimate reality, though changeless in itself, constitutes the ontological foundation of our finite world of change and becoming. Ayer offered this claim as an example of what he called ‘pseudo-propositions’, that is, English sentences seemingly expressing a meaning but actually devoid of informative content; and his malicious remark that the quoted proposition was taken ‘at random’ from Appearance and Reality was clearly designed to implant in the mind of the reader the idea that Bradley’s book largely consisted of such pseudo-propositions. Consequent upon such influences was a change, inimical to idealism, in the whole style of doing philosophy, a change characterized by the development of formal logic and the new respect paid to the deliverances of common sense and of ordinary language. Bradley’s highly wrought prose and his confidence in the metaphysician’s right to adjudicate on the ultimate truth began to seem alien to a later generation of philosophers reared on a mixture of plain talk and formalization and encouraged to defer to mathematics and empirical science. But stylistic choices are not philosophically neutral; no one engaged in producing a system of revisionary metaphysics is likely to accept limitations imposed by ordinary language. Such influences ensured that a misleading and dismissive stereotype of Bradley became current among analytic philosophers and established in their textbooks, so that serious discussion of his work largely disappeared. One result has been that, despite his seminal influence on Russell and their extended controversy over fundamental matters, books and articles on Russell can contain few or even no references to Bradley. Another is that the incidental textbook references to some of Bradley’s most characteristic, original and significant views, e.g. on relations and on truth, are often based on hostile caricatures. With a few exceptions (for instance, McTaggart’s argument for the unreality of time), discussion of the work of the idealists has been sparse since the nineteen thirties. Discussion of Bradley began to revive, as did his reputation, in the nineteen seventies, continuing through the following decades up to the present day. This reorientation does not usually go with an attempt at vindicating Bradley’s overall philosophical outlook. It stands rather in close connection with a revival of interest in the origins of analytic philosophy partly prompted by Rorty’s critique in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Rorty’s attack encouraged analytic philosophy to self-examination and led some thinkers within that tradition to re-examine the foundational myths at the basis of their own ways of practising and conceiving of philosophy. These efforts produced significant results; several monographs and collections became available that correct the inherited misconceptions, discussing Bradley’s philosophy in a more balanced manner. There has also been a revival of interest in his critical examination of the concept of relation within the field of analytic ontology, yet with apparently little interest and appreciation of those broader speculative issues that so much mattered to him. At the time of writing it is clear that he is still widely underrated; it is, however, far from clear that his reputation will ever again stand as high as it did in his own lifetime.