 Most of Buridan's works are in the form of commentaries on Aristotle. He wrote both expositiones (expositions), or literal commentaries consisting of detailed, line-by-line explanations of the meaning of Aristotle's words, and quaestiones (questions), or longer, critical studies of the philosophical issues raised by them, usually centered on a specific lemma from the text. Both genres originated in the classroom, a fact which becomes clear in occasional references to student queries and student concerns which survive in the written versions. Like teachers in our own day, Buridan lectured more than once on the same text over the course of his career, with the result that there are sometimes different versions of his commentary on the same work. For example, there are three versions of his Quaestiones on Aristotle's De anima, the last of which identifies itself as the “third or final lecture [tertia sive ultima lectura]”. Where there are multiple versions of the same commentary, their relationship is generally one of increasing length and sophistication over time. Buridan commented on virtually all of the major works of Aristotle. In addition to the entire Organon, there are commentaries on Aristotle's Physics, On the Heavens, On Generation and Corruption, De Anima, Parva Naturalia, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, and  Rhetoric.[6]  He also wrote a number of shorter, independent treatises on philosophical topics that were controversial in his day, such as the Tractatus de relationibus [Treatise on Relations], Tractatus de universalibus [Treatise on Universals], Tractatus de consequentiis [Treatise on Consequences], and Quaestio de puncto [Question on <the Nature of> Points].  He was a very prolific author. But Buridan's masterwork is the Summulae de dialectica [Compendium of Dialectic], a comprehensive logic textbook which started out as a commentary on the Summulae logicales or logical compendium of the thirteenth-century dialectician, Peter of  Spain,[7]  but soon evolved into an independent work of astonishing breadth and originality. In it, Buridan redeems the older medieval tradition of Aristotelian logic through the via moderna [modern way]—i.e., the newer, terminist logic that had gradually replaced it. Because the work was accessible to master and student alike, it became extremely popular at Paris and in newly-founded universities such as Heidelberg, Prague, and Vienna. Buridan's other works were almost as widely read as the Summulae. Handwritten copies and early printed editions were carried by his students and followers throughout Europe, where they were often used as primary texts in university courses on logic and Aristotelian philosophy, meaning that arts masters would teach Aristotle by reading and explaining Buridan's commentary to the class. As a result, the via Buridani continued to shape European thought well into the Renaissance. Like other medieval philosophers, Buridan's thought has not been fully appreciated because of the lack of modern editions and translations of his work (see bibliography). But the situation began to improve with the appearance in 2001 of Gyula Klima's mammoth translation of the entire Summulae from the (now complete) Latin critical edition of this text. More recently, an edition of Buridan's commentary On Generation and Corruption has appeared (Streijger, Bakker, & Thijssen 2010), along with editions of the first four books of his commentary on the Physics (ed. Streijger & Bakker, 2015, 2016), as well as of his very interesting commentary on pseudo-Albertus-Magnus' treatise De secretis mulierum [On the Secrets of Women] (ed. Beneduce 2017). We also now have a reliable English translation of his groundbreaking Treatise on Consequences (tr. Read 2015). An edition and translation of Buridan's influential commentary on De Anima is virtually complete (ed. Hartman, Sobol, & Zupko, with tr. by Hartman, Klima, & Zupko, forthcoming in 2018).  Other editions are in progress, but knowledge of Latin and the ability to read medieval manuscripts remain essential if one wishes to study Buridan's thought first-hand.