 Medieval natural philosophy included both the rich commentary tradition on Aristotle's Physics, as well as treatises and commentaries on Aristotle's other writings about the natural world: On the Heavens, On Generation and Corruption, De anima, the short treatises on animate powers known as the ‘Parva Naturalia’, and the works on the history, parts, and generation of animals. Buridan wrote commentaries on nearly all of these texts. Like his contemporaries, he understood the speculative sub-disciplines of physics as an orderly progression of teachings. Thus, demonstration in psychology was thought to borrow its principles or starting points from physics, the higher science to which it is subordinated, with its conclusions in turn supplying principles for demonstrations in the more specialized studies of sensation and animal locomotion. The ordering metaphor is never far from Buridan's mind. He remarks to readers of his commentary on Aristotle's De motibus animalium that in this book, “we descend to the different species of motion in particular, e.g., to the fact that some animals fly, others swim, and so on” (DMA I: 535) Besides logic, natural philosophy is the other field in which Buridan has enjoyed some recognition. This is largely due to the efforts of the pioneering historians of science Pierre Duhem and Anneliese Maier, who saw that Buridan played a key role in the demise of the Aristotelian view of the  cosmos.[49]  Buridan's major contribution here was to develop and popularize the theory of impetus, or impressed force, to explain projectile motion. Rejecting the discredited Aristotelian idea of antiperistasis, according to which the tendency of a thrown projectile to continue moving is due to a proximate but external moving cause (such as the air surrounding  it),[50]  he argues that only an internal motive force, transmitted from the mover to the projectile, could explain its continued motion. The theory of impetus probably did not originate with  Buridan,[51]  but his account appears to be unique in that he entertains the possibility that it might not be self-dissipating: “after leaving the arm of the thrower, the projectile would be moved by an impetus given to it by the thrower,” he says, “and would continue to be moved as long as the impetus remained stronger than the resistance, and would be of infinite duration were it not diminished and corrupted by a contrary force resisting it or by something inclining it to a contrary motion” (QM XII.9: 73ra). He also contends that impetus is a variable quality whose force is determined by the speed and quantity of the matter in the subject, so that the acceleration of a falling body can be understood in terms of its gradual accumulation of units of impetus. But despite its revolutionary implications, Buridan did not use the concept of impetus to transform the science of mechanics. He was not, as Duhem argued, a forerunner of Galileo. He remained unapologetically Aristotelian in too many other respects, continuing to hold that motion and rest are contrary states of bodies and that the world is finite in extent. Buridan seems to have been a philosopher who, though well aware of the shortcomings of the Aristotelian natural philosophy, tried to reshape as much of it as he could in the face of a rapidly mechanizing  worldview.[52]  His revolution was in the details. The big, decisive break was left to his successors. Buridan's account of motion is in keeping with his approach to natural science, which is empirical in the sense that it emphasizes the evidentness of appearances, the reliability of a posteriori modes of reasoning, and the application of naturalistic tropes or models of explanation (such as the concept of impetus) to a variety of phenomena.  He is inclined to dismiss purely theological assumptions as irrelevant to the practice of philosophy, as we see in the following tongue-in-cheek remark: “one might assume that there are many more separate substances than there are celestial spheres and celestial motions, viz., great legions of angels [magnae legiones angelorum], but this cannot be proved by demonstrative arguments originating from sense perception” (QM II.9:  73ra).[53] But there are some theological considerations that must be taken seriously.  He concedes that divine omnipotence is such that it is always possible for God to deceive us in ways we could never detect, although this is tempered by his confidence, for which he cites empirical evidence, that our ordinary powers of perception and inductive inference are sufficiently reliable to make “the comprehension of truth with certitude possible for us” (QM II.1: 9ra). He has little patience for skeptical arguments questioning the possibility of scientific knowledge, such as those he believed to have been advanced by Nicholas of Autrecourt, arguing that it is absurd to demand that all knowledge be demonstrable by reduction to the principle of non-contradiction. Natural science is about what happens for the most part, i.e., assuming the common course of nature (Zupko 2003, chs. 12–13). For the same reason, explanatory models in one special science can be usually applied to others in a way that enhances our understanding of the phenomena. Thus, the concept of impetus recurs in Buridan's psychology to explain the difference between occurrent and dispositional thinking, as well as in his ethics, to account for the relative ease with which virtuous persons are able to do the right thing (they have acquired, or cultivated within themselves, an impetus to act virtuously). In psychology, the study of moving beings qua animate, Buridan changed the Aristotelian paradigm in important ways. In contrast with Thomas Aquinas, who wanted to attribute metaphysically more robust qualities, such as per se subsistence, to the human soul, Buridan does not think that psychology is in a position to reveal anything about the inherent nature of its subject, and so he refuses to speculate about it (Zupko 2007a). He sees the science of psychology as concerned not with some quidditative concept of the soul arrived at by a priori reasoning, but with specifying the relation between animate qualities and the soul as their proper subject: “the natural philosopher only studies substances in relation to their motion and operations (see Zupko 2007b, 2008, 2017ab). And since natural forms require for their operations a determinate matter made suitable for them by qualitative and quantitative dispositions, natural scientists must define forms through their proper matter. Therefore, in its natural definition, the soul must be defined by means of a physical, organic body” (QDA II.3). This led to an even more attenuated conception of the soul in the De anima commentaries of Buridan's Parisian successors, Nicole Oresme and Peter of Ailly, for whom the soul functions as a kind of placeholder whose nature is not even relevant to psychology. Consideration of the soul's ultimate nature migrated to the faculty of theology, where it was considered along with the same Augustinian dreaming arguments that undoubtedly influenced Descartes (See Zupko 1999 and 2003, chs. 10–11).