 In the tradition in philosophical logic dealing with contextual effects on the interpretation of expressions, as well as in the more recent tradition in dynamic logic, context is primarily formalized as an assignment of values to variables, and the language is designed to make explicit reasoning about context either very limited or outright impossible. Concern in AI about the representation of large and apparently heterogeneous domains and about the integration of disparate knowledge sources, as well as interests in formalizing common sense of the sort discussed in  Section 2.2,  above, have led to interest in the AI community in formalizing languages that take context into account more explicitly. In  McCarthy 1993b,  McCarthy recommends the study of languages containing a construct where ist is read “is-true.” This is analogous to the Holds construct of the situation calculus—but now c stands for a context, and φ is a possibly complex propositional representation, which many (including McCarthy) take to refer to a sentence. There are analogies here both to modal logic and to languages with an explicit truth predicate. But the applications that are envisioned for a logic of context create opportunities and problems that are in many ways new.  Work on the logic of context subsequent to McCarthy’s original suggestion, includes  McCarthy & Buvac 1998, Guha 1991, and some of the papers in the conference volumes Akman et al. 2001,  Bouquet et al. 1999. For extensions of Richard Montague’s Intensional Logic motivated by McCarthy’s suggestions, see Thomason 2003 and 2005. For some reason, work on the explicit formalization of context hasn’t been actively pursued by the computational community beyond this point. Philosophical interest in context, and especially in the interaction of context with propositional attitudes and modals, continues to be strong; but the very general logical frameworks for context that  McCarthy envisioned have yet not been taken up by philosophers.