 One important reason for the successes of modern logic is its use of what has been called “formalization”. This term is usually employed to cover several distinct (though related) phenomena, all of them present in Frege (1879). One of these is the use of a completely specified set of artificial symbols to which the logician unambiguously assigns meanings, related to the meanings of corresponding natural language expressions, but much more clearly delimited and stripped from the notes that in those natural language expressions seem irrelevant to truth-conditional content; this is especially true of symbols meant to represent the logical expressions of natural language. Another phenomenon is the stipulation of a completely precise grammar for the formulae construed out of the artificial symbols, formulae that will be “stripped” versions of correlate sentences in natural language; this grammar amounts to an algorithm for producing formulae starting from the basic symbols. A third phenomenon is the postulation of a deductive calculus with a very clear specification of axioms and rules of inference for the artificial formulae (see the next section); such a calculus is intended to represent in some way deductive reasoning with the correlates of the formulae, but unlike ordinary deductions, derivations in the calculus contain no steps that are not definite applications of the specified rules of inference. Instead of attempting to characterize the logical truths of a natural language like English, the Fregean logician attempts to characterize the artificial formulae that are “stripped” correlates of those logical truths in a Fregean formalized language. In first-order Fregean formalized languages, among these formulae one finds artificial correlates of (1), (2) and (3), things like (See the entry on logic, classical.)  Fregean formalized languages include also classical higher-order languages. (See the entry on   logic, second-order and higher-order.)  The logical expressions in these languages are standardly taken to be the symbols for the truth-functions, the quantifiers, identity and other symbols definable in terms of those (but there are dissenting views on the status of the higher-order quantifiers; see 2.4.3 below). The restriction to artificial formulae raises a number of questions about the exact value of the Fregean enterprise for the demarcation of logical truths in natural language; much of this value depends on how many and how important are perceived to be the notes stripped from the natural language expressions that are correlates of the standard logical expressions of formalized languages. But whatever one's view of the exact value of formalization, there is little doubt that it has been very illuminating for logical purposes. One reason is that it's often clear that the stripped notes are really irrelevant to truth-conditional content (this is especially true of the use of natural language logical expressions for doing mathematics). Another of the reasons is that the fact that the grammar and meaning of the artificial formulae is so well delimited has permitted the development of proposed characterizations of logical truth that use only concepts of standard mathematics. This in turn has allowed the study of the characterized notions by means of standard mathematical techniques. The next two sections describe the two main approaches to characterization in broad outline.[7] We just noted that the Fregean logician's formalized grammar amounts to an algorithm for producing formulae from the basic artificial symbols. This is meant very literally. As was clear to mathematical logicians from very early on, the basic symbols can be seen as (or codified by) natural numbers, and the formation rules in the artificial grammar can be seen as (or codified by) simple computable arithmetical operations. The grammatical formulae can then be seen as (or codified by) the numbers obtainable from the basic numbers after some finite series of applications of the operations, and thus their set is characterizable in terms of concepts of arithmetic and set theory (in fact arithmetic suffices, with the help of some tricks). Exactly the same is true of the set of formulae that are derivable in a formalized deductive calculus. A formula \(F\) is derivable in a Fregean calculus \(C\) just in case \(F\) is obtainable from the axioms of \(C\) after some finite series of applications of the rules of inference of \(C\). But the axioms are certain formulae built by the process of grammatical formation, so they can be seen as (or codified by) certain numbers; and the rules of inference can again be seen as (or codified by) certain computable arithmetical operations. So the derivable formulae can be seen as (or codified by) the numbers obtainable from the axiom numbers after some finite series of applications of the inference operations, and thus their set is again characterizable in terms of concepts of standard mathematics (again arithmetic suffices). In the time following Frege's revolution, there appears to have been a widespread belief that the set of logical truths of any Fregean language could be characterized as the set of formulae derivable in some suitably chosen calculus (hence, essentially, as the set of numbers obtainable by certain arithmetical operations). Frege himself says, speaking of the higher-order language in his “Begriffsschrift”, that through formalization (in the third sense above) “we arrive at a small number of laws in which, if we add those contained in the rules, the content of all the laws is included, albeit in an undeveloped state” (Frege 1879, §13). The idea follows straightforwardly from Russell's conception of mathematics and logic as identical (see Russell 1903, ch. I, §10; Russell 1920, pp. 194–5) and his thesis that “by the help of ten principles of deduction and ten other premises of a general logical nature (…), all mathematics can be strictly and formally deduced” (Russell 1903, ch. I, §4). See also Bernays (1930, p. 239): “[through formalization] it becomes evident that all logical inference (…) can be reduced to a limited number of logical elementary processes that can be exactly and completely enumerated”. In the opening paragraphs of his paper on logical consequence, Tarski (1936a, 1936b) says that the belief was prevalent before the appearance of Gödel's incompleteness theorems (see subsection 2.4.3 below for the bearing of these theorems on this issue).  In recent times, apparently due to the influence of Tarskian arguments such as the one mentioned towards the end of subsection 2.4.3, the belief in the adequacy of derivability characterizations seems to have waned (see e.g. Prawitz 1985 for a similar appraisal). Even on the most cautious way of understanding the modality present in logical truths, a sentence is a logical truth only if no sentence which is a replacement instance of its logical form is false. (This idea is only rejected by those who reject the notion of logical form.) It is a common observation that this property, even if it is necessary, is not clearly sufficient for a sentence to be a logical truth. Perhaps there is a sentence that has this property but is not really logically true, because one could assign some unexpressed meanings to the variables and the schematic letters in its logical form, and under those meanings the form would be a false  sentence.[8]  On the other hand, it is not clearly incorrect to think that a sentence is a logical truth if no collective assignment of meanings to the variables and the schematic letters in its logical form would turn this form into a false sentence. Say that a sentence is universally valid when it has this property. A standard approach to the mathematical characterization of logical truth, alternative to the derivability approach, uses always some version of the property of universal validity, proposing it in each case as both necessary and sufficient for logical truth. Note that if a sentence is universally valid then, even if it's not logically true, it will be true. So all universally valid sentences are correct at least in this sense. Apparently, the first to use a version of universal validity and explicitly propose it as both necessary and sufficient for logical truth was Bolzano (see Bolzano 1837, §148; and Coffa 1991, pp. 33–4 for the claim of priority). The idea is also present in other mathematicians of the nineteenth century (see e.g. Jané 2006), and was common in Hilbert's school. Tarski (1936a, 1936b) was the first to indicate in a fully explicit way how the version of universal validity used by the mathematicians could itself be given a characterization in terms of concepts of standard mathematics, in the case of Fregean formalized languages with an algorithmic grammar. Essentially Tarski's characterization is widely used today in the form of what is known as the model-theoretic notion of validity, and it seems fair to say that it is usually accepted that this notion gives a reasonably good delineation of the set of logical truths for Fregean languages. The notion of model-theoretic validity mimics the notion of universal validity, but is defined just with the help of the set-theoretic apparatus developed by Tarski (1935) for the characterization of semantic concepts such as satisfaction, definability, and truth.  (See the entry on    Tarski's truth definitions.)  Given a Fregean language, a structure for the language is a set-theoretical object composed of a set-domain taken together with an assignment of extensions drawn from that domain to its non-logical constants. A structure is meant by most logicians to represent an assignment of meanings: its domain gives the range or “meaning” of the first-order variables (and induces ranges of the higher-order variables), and the extensions that the structure assigns to the non-logical constants are “meanings” that these expressions could take. Using the Tarskian apparatus, one defines for the formulae of the Fregean language the notion of truth in (or satisfaction by) a set-theoretic structure (with respect to an infinite sequence assigning an object of the domain to each variable).  And finally, one defines a formula to be model-theoretically valid just in case it is true in all structures for its language (with respect to all infinite sequences). Let's abbreviate “\(F\) is true in all structures” as “MTValid\((F)\)”. The model-theoretic characterization makes it clear that “MTValid\((F)\)” is definable purely in terms of concepts of set theory. (The notion of model-theoretic validity for Fregean languages is explained in thorough detail in the entries on  classical logic and  second-order and higher-order logic;  see also the entry on  model theory.)[9] (If \(F\) is a formula of a first-order language without identity, then if no replacement instance of the form of \(F\) is false, this is a sufficient condition for \(F\)'s being model-theoretically valid.  As it turns out, if \(F\) is not model-theoretically valid, then some replacement instance of its form whose variables range over the natural numbers and whose non-logical constants are arithmetical expressions will be false. This can be justified by means of a refinement of the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem.  See the entry on logic, classical,  and Quine 1970, ch. 4, for discussion and references. No similar results hold for higher-order languages.) The “MT” in “MTValid\((F)\)” stresses the fact that model-theoretic validity is different from universal validity. The notion of a meaning assignment which appears in the description of universal validity is a very imprecise and intuitive notion, while the notion of a structure appearing in a characterization of model-theoretic validity is a fairly precise and technical one. It seems clear that the notion of a structure for Fregean formalized languages is minimally reasonable, in the sense that a structure models the power of one or several meaning assignments to make false (the logical form of) some sentence. As we will mention later, the converse property, that each meaning assignment's validity-refuting power is modeled by some structure, is also a natural but more demanding requirement on a notion of structure. The fact that the notions of derivability and model-theoretic validity are definable in standard mathematics seems to have been a very attractive feature of them among practicing logicians. But this attractive feature of course does not justify by itself taking either notion as an adequate characterization of logical truth. On most views, with a mathematical characterization of logical truth we attempt to delineate a set of formulae possessing a number of non-mathematical properties.  Which properties these are varies depending on our pretheoretic conception of, for example, the features of modality and formality. (By “pretheoretic” it's not meant “previous to any theoretical activity”; there could hardly be a “pretheoretic” conception of logical truth in this sense. In this context what's meant is “previous to the theoretical activity of mathematical characterization”.) But on any such conception there will be external, non-mathematical criteria that can be applied to evaluate the question whether a mathematical characterization is adequate. In this last section we will outline some of the basic issues and results on the question whether derivability and model-theoretic validity are adequate in this sense. One frequent objection to the adequacy of model-theoretic validity is that it does not provide a conceptual analysis of the notion of logical truth, even for sentences of Fregean formalized languages (see e.g. Pap 1958, p. 159; Kneale and Kneale 1962, p. 642; Field 1989, pp. 33–4; Etchemendy 1990, ch. 7). This complaint is especially common among authors who feel inclined to identify logical truth and analyticity simpliciter (see e.g. Kneale and Kneale, ibid., Etchemendy 1990, p. 126). If one thinks of the concept of logical truth simply as the concept of analytic truth, it is especially reasonable to accept that the concept of logical truth does not have much to do with the concept of model-theoretic validity, for presumably this concept does not have much to do with the concept of analyticity. To say that a formula is model-theoretically valid means that there are no set-theoretic structures in which it is false; hence, to say that a formula is not model-theoretically valid means that there are set-theoretic structures in which it is false. But to say that a sentence is or is not analytic presumably does not mean anything about the existence or non-existence of set-theoretic structures. Note that we could object to derivability on the same grounds, for to say that a sentence is or is not analytic presumably does not mean anything about its being or not being the product of a certain algorithm (compare Etchemendy 1990, p. 3). (One further peculiar, much debated claim in Etchemendy 1990 is that true claims of the form “\(F\) is logically true” or “\(F\) is not logically true” should themselves be logical truths (while the corresponding claims “MTValid\((F)\)” and “Not MTValid\((F)\)” are not logical truths). Etchemendy's claim is perhaps defensible under a conception of logical truth as analyticity simpliciter, but certainly doubtful on more traditional conceptions of logical truth, on which the predicate “is a logical truth” is not even a logical expression. See Gómez-Torrente 1998/9 and Soames 1999, ch. 4 for discussion.) Analogous “no conceptual analysis” objections can be made if we accept that the concept of logical truth has some other strong modal notes unrelated to analyticity; for example, if we accept that it is part of the concept of logical truth that logical truths are true in all counterfactual circumstances, or necessary in some other strong sense. Sher (1996) accepts something like the requirement that a good characterization of logical truth should be given in terms of a modally rich concept. However, she argues that the notion of model-theoretic validity is strongly modal, and so the “no conceptual analysis” objection is actually wrong: to say that a formula is or is not model-theoretically valid is to make a mathematical existence or non-existence claim, and according to Sher these claims are best read as claims about the possibility and necessity of structures. (Shalkowski 2004 argues that Sher's defense of model-theoretic validity is insufficient, on the basis of a certain metaphysical conception of logical necessity. Etchemendy 2008 relatedly argues that Sher's defense is based on inadequate restrictions on the modality relevant to logical truth. See also the critical discussion of Sher in Hanson 1997.)  García-Carpintero (1993) offers a view related to Sher's: model-theoretic validity provides a (correct) conceptual analysis of logical truth for Fregean languages, because the notion of a set-theoretical structure is in fact a subtle refinement of the modal notion of a possible meaning assignment. Azzouni (2006), ch. 9, also defends the view that model-theoretic validity provides a correct conceptual analysis of logical truth (though restricted to first-order languages), on the basis of a certain deflationist conception of the (strong) modality involved in logical truth. The standard view of set-theoretic claims, however, does not see them as strong modal claims—at best, some of them are modal in the minimal sense that they are universal generalizations or particular cases of these. But it is at any rate unclear that this is the basis for a powerful objection to model-theoretic validity or to derivability, for, even if we accept that the concept of logical truth is strongly modal, it is unclear that a good characterization of logical truth ought to be a conceptual analysis. An analogy might help.  It is widely agreed that the characterizations of the notion of computability in standard mathematics, e.g. as recursiveness, are in some sense good characterizations. Note that the concept of computability is modal, in a moderately strong sense; it seems to be about what a being like us could do with certain symbols if he were free from certain limitations—not about, say, what existing beings have done or will do. However, to say that a certain function is recursive is not to make a modal claim about it, but a certain purely arithmetical claim. So recursiveness is widely agreed to provide a good characterization of computability, but it clearly does not provide a conceptual analysis. Perhaps it could be argued that the situation with model-theoretic validity, or derivability, or both, is the same. A number of philosophers explicitly reject the requirement that a good characterization of logical truth should provide a conceptual analysis, and (at least for the sake of argument) do not question the usual view of set-theoretic claims as non-modal, but have argued that the universe of set-theoretic structures somehow models the universe of possible structures (or at least the universe of possible set-theoretic structures; see McGee 1992, Shapiro 1998, Sagi 2014). In this indirect sense, the characterization in terms of model-theoretic validity would grasp part of the strong modal force that logical truths are often perceived to possess. McGee (1992) gives an elegant argument for this idea: it is reasonable to think that given any set-theoretic structure, even one construed out of non-mathematical individuals, actualized or not, there is a set-theoretic structure isomorphic to it but construed exclusively out of pure sets; but any such pure set-theoretic structure is, on the usual view, an actualized existent; so every possible set-theoretic structure is modeled by a set-theoretic structure, as desired. (The significance of this relies on the fact that in Fregean languages a formula is true in a structure if and only if it is true in all the structures isomorphic to it.) But model-theoretic validity (or derivability) might be theoretically adequate in some way even if some possible meaning-assignments are not modeled straightforwardly by (actual) set-theoretic structures. For model-theoretic validity to be theoretically adequate, it might be held, it is enough if we have other reasons to think that it is extensionally adequate, i.e.  that it coincides in extension with our preferred pretheoretic notion of logical truth. In subsections 2.4.2 and 2.4.3 we will examine some existing arguments for and against the plain extensional adequacy of derivability and model-theoretic validity for Fregean languages. If one builds one's deductive calculus with care, one will be able to convince oneself that all the formulae derivable in the calculus are logical truths. The reason is that one can have used one's intuition very systematically to obtain that conviction: one can have included in one's calculus only axioms of which one is convinced that they are logical truths; and one can have included as rules of inference rules of which one is convinced that they produce logical truths when applied to logical truths. Using another terminology, this means that, if one builds one's calculus with care, one will be convinced that the derivability characterization of logical truth for formulae of the formalized language will be sound with respect to logical truth. It is equally obvious that if one has at hand a notion of model-theoretic validity for a formalized language which is based on a minimally reasonable notion of structure, then all logical truths (of that language) will be model-theoretically valid. The reason is simple: if a formula is not model-theoretically valid then there is a structure in which it is false; but this structure must then model a meaning assignment (or assignments) on which the formula (or its logical form) is false; so it will be possible to construct a formula with the same logical form, whose non-logical expressions have, by stipulation, the particular meanings drawn from that collective meaning assignment, and which is therefore false. But then the idea of formality and the weakest conception of the modal force of logical truths uncontroversially imply that the original formula is not logically true. Using another terminology, we can conclude that model-theoretic validity is complete with respect to logical truth. Let's abbreviate “\(F\) is derivable in calculus \(C\)” by “DC\((F)\)” and “\(F\) is a logical truth (in our preferred pretheoretical sense)” by “LT\((F)\)”. Then, if \(C\) is a calculus built to suit our pretheoretic conception of logical truth, the situation can be summarized thus: The first implication is the soundness of derivability; the second is the completeness of model-theoretic validity. In order to convince ourselves that the characterizations of logical truth in terms of DC\((F)\) and MTValid\((F)\) are extensionally adequate we should convince ourselves that the converse implications hold too: Obtaining this conviction, or the conviction that these implications don't in fact hold, turns out to be difficult in general. But a remark of Kreisel (1967) establishes that a conviction that they hold can be obtained sometimes. In some cases it is possible to give a mathematical proof that derivability (in some specified calculus \(C\)) is complete with respect to model-theoretic validity, i.e. a proof of Kreisel called attention to the fact that (6) together with (4) implies that model-theoretic validity is sound with respect to logical truth, i.e., that the first implication of (5) holds. (Strictly speaking, this is a strong generalization of Kreisel's remark, which in place of “\(\text{LT}(F)\)” had something like “\(F\) is true in all class structures” (structures with a class, possibly proper, as domain of the individual variables).) This means that when (6) holds the notion of model-theoretic validity offers an extensionally correct characterization of logical truth. (See Etchemendy 1990, ch. 11, Hanson 1997, Gómez-Torrente 1998/9, and Field 2008, ch. 2, for versions of this observation, and Smith 2011 and Griffiths 2014 for objections.) Also, (6), together with (4), implies that the notion of derivability is complete with respect to logical truth (the second implication in (5)) and hence offers an extensionally correct characterization of this notion. Note that this reasoning is very general and independent of what our particular pretheoretic conception of logical truth is. An especially significant case in which this reasoning can be applied is the case of first-order quantificational languages, under a wide array of pretheoretic conceptions of logical truth. It is typical to accept that all formulae derivable in a typical first-order calculus are universally valid, true in all counterfactual circumstances, a priori and analytic if any formula  is.[10]  So (4) holds under a wide array of pretheoretic conceptions in this case. (6) holds too for the typical calculi in question, in virtue of Gödel's completeness theorem, so (5) holds. This means that one can convince oneself that both derivability and model-theoretic validity are extensionally correct characterizations of our favorite pretheoretic notion of logical truth for first-order languages, if our pretheoretic conception is not too eccentric. The situation is not so clear in other languages of special importance for the Fregean tradition, the higher-order quantificational languages. It follows from Gödel's first incompleteness theorem that already for a second-order language there is no calculus \(C\) where derivability is sound with respect to model-theoretic validity and which makes true (6) (for the notion of model-theoretic validity as usually defined for such a language). We may call this result the incompleteness of second-order calculi with respect to model-theoretic validity. Said another way: for every second-order calculus \(C\) sound with respect to model-theoretic validity there will be a formula \(F\) such that \(\text{MTValid}(F)\) but it is not the case that \(\text{DC}(F)\). In this situation it's not possible to apply Kreisel's argument for (5). In fact, the incompleteness of second-order calculi shows that, given any calculus \(C\) satisfying (4), one of the implications of (5) is false (or both are): either derivability in \(C\) is incomplete with respect to logical truth or model-theoretic validity is unsound with respect to logical truth. Different authors have extracted opposed lessons from incompleteness. A common reaction is to think that model-theoretic validity must be unsound with respect to logical truth. This is especially frequent in philosophers on whose conception logical truths must be a priori or analytic. One idea is that the results of a priori reasoning or of analytic thinking ought to be codifiable in a calculus. (See e.g. Wagner 1987, p. 8.) But even if we grant this idea, it's doubtful that the desired conclusion follows. Suppose that (i) every a priori or analytic reasoning must be reproducible in a calculus. We accept also, of course, that (ii) for every calculus \(C\) sound with respect to model-theoretic validity there is a model-theoretically valid formula that is not derivable in \(C\).  From all this it doesn't follow that (iii) there is a model-theoretically valid formula \(F\) such that for every calculus \(C\) sound for model-theoretic validity \(F\) is not derivable in C.  From (iii) and (i) it follows of course that there are model-theoretically valid formulae that are not obtainable by a priori or analytic reasoning. But the step from (ii) to (iii) is a typical quantificational fallacy. From (i) and (ii) it doesn't follow that there is any model-theoretically valid formula which is not obtainable by a priori or analytic reasoning. The only thing that follows (from (ii) alone under the assumptions that model-theoretic validity is sound with respect to logical truth and that logical truths are a priori and analytic) is that no calculus sound with respect to model-theoretic validity can by itself model all the a priori or analytic reasonings that people are able to make. But it's not sufficiently clear that this should be intrinsically problematic. After all, a priori and analytic reasonings must start from basic axioms and rules, and for all we know a reflective mind may have an inexhaustible ability to find new truths and truth-preserving rules by a priori or analytic consideration of even a meager stock of concepts. The claim that all analytic truths ought to be derivable in one single calculus is perhaps plausible on the view that analyticity is to be explained by conventions or “tacit agreements”, for these agreements are presumably finite in number, and their implications are presumably at most effectively enumerable. But this view is just one problematic idea about how apriority and analyticity should be explicated. (See also Etchemendy (1990), chs.  8, 9, for an argument for the unsoundness of higher-order model-theoretic validity based on the conception of logical truth as analyticity simpliciter, and Gómez-Torrente (1998/9), Soames (1999), ch. 4, and Paseau (2014) for critical reactions.) Another type of unsoundness arguments attempt to show that there is some higher-order formula that is model-theoretically valid but is intuitively false in a structure whose domain is a proper class. (The “intended interpretation” of set theory, if it exists at all, might be one such structure, for it is certainly not a set; see the entry on  set theory.) These arguments thus  question the claim that each meaning assignment's validity-refuting power is modeled by some set-theoretic structure, a claim which is surely a corollary of the first implication in (5). (In McGee 1992 there is a good example; there is critical discussion in Gómez-Torrente 1998/9.) The most widespread view among set theorists seems to be that there are no formulae with that property in Fregean languages, but it's certainly not an absolutely firm belief of theirs. Note that these arguments offer a challenge only to the idea that universal validity (as defined in section 2.3) is adequately modeled by set-theoretic validity, not to the soundness of a characterization of logical truth in terms of universal validity itself, or in terms of a species of validity based on some notion of “meaning assignment” different from the usual notion of a set-theoretic structure. (The arguments we mentioned in the preceding paragraph and in 2.4.1 would have deeper implications if correct, for they easily imply challenges to all characterizations in terms of species of validity as well). In fact, worries of this kind have prompted the proposal of a different kind of notions of validity (for Fregean languages), in which set-theoretic structures are replaced with suitable values of higher-order variables in a higher-order language for set theory, e.g. with “plural interpretations” (see Boolos 1985, Rayo and Uzquiano 1999, Williamson 2003; see also the entry on  plural quantification).  Both set-theoretic and proper class structures are modeled by such values, so these particular worries of unsoundness do not affect this kind of proposals. In general, there are no fully satisfactory philosophical arguments for the thesis that model-theoretic validity is unsound with respect to logical truth in higher-order languages. Are there then any good reasons to think that derivability (in any calculus sound for model-theoretic validity) must be incomplete with respect to logical truth? There don't seem to be any absolutely convincing reasons for this view either.  The main argument (the first version of which was perhaps first made explicit in Tarski 1936a, 1936b) seems to be this. As noted above, Gödel's first incompleteness theorem implies that for any calculus for a higher-order language there will be a model-theoretically valid formula that will not be derivable in the calculus. As it turns out, the formula obtained by the Gödel construction is also always intuitively true in all domains (set-theoretical or not), and it's reasonable to think of it as universally valid. (It's certainly not a formula false in a proper class structure.) The argument concludes that for any calculus there are logically true formulae that are not derivable in it. From this it has been concluded that derivability (in any calculus) must be incomplete with respect to logical truth. But a fundamental problem is that this conclusion is based on two assumptions that will not necessarily be granted by the champion of derivability: first, the assumption that the expressions typically cataloged as logical in higher-order languages, and in particular the quantifiers in quantifications of the form \(\forall X\) (where \(X\) is a higher-order variable), are in fact logical expressions; and second, the assumption that being universally valid is a sufficient condition for logical truth. On these assumptions it is certainly very reasonable to think that derivability, in any calculus satisfying (4), must be incomplete with respect to logical truth. But in the absence of additional considerations, a critic may question the assumptions, and deny relevance to the argument. The second assumption would probably be questioned e.g. from the point of view that logical truths must be analytic, for there is no conclusive reason to think that universally valid formulae must be analytic. The first assumption actually underlies any conviction one may have that (4) holds for any one particular higher-order calculus.  (Note that if we denied that the higher-order quantifiers are logical expressions we could equally deny that the arguments presented above against the soundness of model-theoretic validity with respect to logical truth are relevant at all.)  That the higher-order quantifiers are logical has often been denied on the grounds that they are semantically too “substantive”. It is often pointed out in this connection that higher-order quantifications can be used to define sophisticated set-theoretic properties that one cannot define just with the help of first-order quantifiers. (Defenders of the logical status of higher-order quantifications, on the other hand, point to the wide applicability of the higher-order quantifiers, to the fact that they are analogous to the first-order quantifiers, to the fact that they are typically needed to provide categorical axiomatizations of mathematical structures, etc. See Quine (1970), ch.  5, for the standard exponent of the restrictive view, and Boolos (1975) and Shapiro (1991) for standard exponents of the liberal view.)