 In the 1930s Susan Stebbing and John Wisdom, founding what has come to be called the “Cambridge School of Analysis,” paid considerable attention to the notion of logical construction (see Beaney 2003). Stebbing (1933) was concerned with the unclarity over whether it was expressions or entities that are logical constructions, and with how to understand a claim such as “this table is a logical construction” and indeed what it could even mean to contrast logical constructions with inferred entities. Russell had been motivated by the logicist project of finding definitions and elementary premises from which mathematical statements could be proved. Stebbing and Wisdom were concerned, rather, with relating the notion of construction to philosophical analysis of ordinary language. Wisdom’s (1931) series of papers in Mind interpreted logical constructions in terms of ideas from Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (1921). Demopoulos and Friedman (1985) find an anticipation of the recent “structural realist” view of scientific theories in (Russell 1927), The Analysis of Matter. They argue that the logical constructions of sense data in Russell’s earlier thinking on the “problem of matter” were replaced by inferences to the structural properties of space and matter from patterns of sense data. We may sense patches of color next to each other in our visual field, but what that tells us about the causes of those sense data, about matter, is only revealed by the structure of those relationships. Thus the color of a patch in our visual field tells us nothing about the intrinsic properties of the table that causes that experience. Instead it is the structural properties of our experiences, such as their relative order in time, and which are between which others in the visual field, that gives us a clue as to the structural relationships of time and space within the material world that causes the experience. The contemporary version of this account, called “structural realism”, holds that it is only the structural properties and relations that a scientific theory attributes to the world about which we should be scientific realists. (See the entry on  structural realism.) According to this account, Russell’s initial project of replacing inference with logical construction was to find for each pattern of sense data some logical construction that bears a pattern of isomorphic structural relations. That project was transformed, Demopoulos and Friedman argue, by replacing inference from the given in experience to the cause of that experience with an inference to the rather impoverished, structural, reality of the causes of those experiences. Russell’s matter project was interpreted in this way by others, and led, in 1928, to G.H. Newman’s apparently devastating objection. Newman (1928) pointed out that there is always a structure of arbitrarily “constructed” relations with any given structure if only the number of basic entities, in this case sense data, is large enough. According to Demopoulos and Friedman, Newman shows that there must be more to scientific theories than trivial statements to the effect that matter has some structural properties isomorphic to those of our sense data. The project of The Analysis of Matter does indeed face a serious difficulty with “Newman’s problem”, whether or not those difficulties arise for the earlier project of logical construction (see Linsky 2013). The notion of logical construction had a great impact on the future course of analytic philosophy. One line of influence was via the notion of a contextual definition, or paraphrase, intended to minimize ontological commitment and to be a model of philosophical analysis. The distinction between the surface appearance of definite descriptions, as singular terms, and the fully interpreted sentences from which they seem to disappear was seen as a model for making problematic notions disappear upon analysis. Wisdom (1931) proposed this application of logical construction in the spirit of Wittgenstein. In this way the theory of descriptions has been viewed as a paradigm of philosophical analysis of this “therapeutic” sort that seeks to dissolve logical problems. A more technical strand in analytic philosophy was influenced by the construction of matter. Rudolf Carnap quotes (Russell 1914a, 11) as the motto for his “Aufbau”, the Logical Structure of the World (1967): The supreme maxim in scientific philosophizing is this: Whenever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities. (Carnap 1967, 6) In the Aufbau the construction of matter from “elementary experiences”, and later Nelson Goodman (1951) continued the project. Michael Friedman (1999) and Alan Richardson (1998) have argued that Carnap’s project of construction owed much more to his background in neo-Kantian issues about the “constitution” of empirical objects than with Russell’s project. See, however, Pincock (2002) for a response that argues for the importance of Russell’s project of reconstructing scientific knowledge in (Carnap 1967). More generally, the use of set theoretic constructions became widespread among philosophers, and continues in the construction of set theoretic models, both in the sense of logic where they model formal theories and to provide descriptions of truth conditions for sentences about entities. Willard van Orman Quine saw his notion of “explication” as a development of logical construction. Quine presents his methodology in Word and Object (1960) beginning with an allusion to Ramsey’s remark in the title of section 53: “The Ordered Pair as Philosophical Paradigm”. The problem of apparently referring expressions that motivates Russell’s theory of descriptions is presented as a general problem: A pattern repeatedly illustrated in recent sections is that of the defective noun that proves undeserving of objects and is dismissed as an irreferential fragment of a few containing phrases. But some times the defective noun fares oppositely: its utility is found to turn on the admission of denoted objects as values of the variables of quantification. In such a case our job is to devise interpretations for it in the term positions where, in its defectiveness, it had not used to occur. (Quine 1960, 257) The notion of a “defective noun” that is to be “dismissed as an irreferential fragment” clearly echoes the description of constructions as logical fictions and their expressions as mere incomplete symbols that so aptly describe the contextual definitions for definite descriptions and classes. The task of “devising interpretations” is more like the positive aspect suggested by the term “construction” and illustrated in the cases of the construction of numbers and matter. After concluding that the expression “ordered pair” was such a “defective noun”, Quine says that the notion of an ordered pair \(\langle x,y \rangle\) of two entities \(x\) and \(y\) does have “utility” and is limited only in having to fulfill one “postulate”: In other words, that ordered pairs are distinguished by having unique first and second elements. Quine then continues: The problem of suitably eking out the use of these defective nouns can be solved once for all by systematically fixing upon some suitable already-recognized object, for each \(x\) and \(y\), with which to identify \(\langle x,y \rangle\). The problem is a neat one, for we have in (1) a single explicit standard by which to judge whether a version is suitable. (Quine 1960, 258) Again Quine echoes Russell’s language with his mention of a “neat” property that calls out for a “construction” from known entities. Quine distinguishes his project, which he calls “explication”, by the fact that there are alternative possible ways to fix the notion. Although Whitehead and Russell give an account in PM *55, where they are called “ordinal couples”, the first proposal to treat ordered pairs as classes of their members is from Norbert Wiener (1914) who identifies \(\langle x,y \rangle\) with \(\{\{ x \}, \{ y, \Lambda \}\}\), where \(\Lambda\) is the empty class. From this definition it is easy to recover the first and second elements of the pair, and so Quine’s (1) is an elementary theorem. Later, Kuratowski proposed the definition \(\{\{ x \}, \{x,y\}\}\), from which (1) also follows. For Quine it is a matter of choice which definition to use, as the points on which they differ are “don’t-cares”, issues which give a precise answer to questions about which our pre-theoretic account is mute. An explication thus differs considerably from an “analysis” of ordinary, or pre-theoretic language, both in giving a precise meaning to the expression where it might have been obscure, or perhaps simply silent and in possibly differing from pre-theoretic use, as suggested by the name. This fits well with the asymmetries we have noted between analysis and construction, with analysis aimed at the discovery of the constituents and structure of propositions which are given to us, and construction which is more a matter of choice, with the goal being the recovery of particular “neat” features of the construction in a formal theory. The ordered pair is thus a “philosophical paradigm” for Quine just as Russell’s theory of descriptions was a paradigm of philosophy for Ramsey, and each is a “logical construction”.