 The precomputational literature in philosophical logic relating to spatial reasoning is very sparse in relation, for instance, to the temporal literature. The need to support computational reasoning about space, however, in application areas such as motion planning and manipulation in physical space, the indexing and retrieval of images, geographic information systems, diagrammatic reasoning, and the design of high-level graphics programs has led to new interest in spatial representations and spatial reasoning. Of course, the geometrical tradition provides an exceptionally strong mathematical resource for this enterprise. But as in many other AI-related areas, it is not clear that the available mathematical theories are appropriate for informing these applications, and many computer scientists have felt it worthwhile to develop new foundations. Some of this work is closely related to the research in qualitative reasoning mentioned above in  Section 2.2,  and in some cases has been carried out by the same individuals. The literature in spatial reasoning is extensive; for references to some areas not discussed here, see  Stock 1997,  Kapur & Mundy 1988,  Hammer 1995,  Wilson 1998,  Osherson & Lasnik 1990,  Renz & Nebel 1999,  Yeap & Jeffries 1999,  Forbus et al. 1991,  Chen 1990,  Burger & Bhanu 1992,  Allwein & Barwise 1996,  Glasgow et al. 1995,  and  Kosslyn 1990.  Here, we discuss only one trend, which is closely connected with parallel work in philosophical logic. Qualitative approaches to space were introduced into the logical literature early in the twentieth century by Lesniewski; see  Lesniewski 1916,  which presents the idea of a mereology, or qualitative theory of the part-whole relation between physical individuals. This idea of a logical theory of relations among regions or the objects that occupy them, which does not depend on construing regions as sets of points, remained an active area of philosophical logic, even though it attracted relatively few researchers. More recent work in the philosophical literature, especially  Casati & Varzi 1999,  Simons 1987,  Casati & Varzi 1996,  Clarke 1981,  Clarke 1985,  as directly influential on current computational work. The Regional Connection Calculus (RCC), developed by computer scientists at the University of Leeds, is based on a primitive C relating regions of space: the intended interpretation of C(x, y) is that the intersection of the closures of the values of x and y is nonempty.  (See  Cohn et al. 1997,  Cohn 1996)  for details and references.) One area of research concerns the definability of shapes in RCC. The extent of what can be defined with this simple primitive is surprising, but the technicalities quickly become complex; see, for instance,  Gotts 1994,  Gotts 1996).  The work cited in  Cohn et al. 1997  describes constraint propagation techniques and encodings in intuitionistic propositional logic as ways of supporting implemented reasoning based on RCC and some of its extensions. More recent work based on RCC addresses representation and reasoning about motion, which of course combines spatial and temporal issues; see  Wolter & Zakharyaschev 2000).  For more information about qualitative theories of movement, with references to other approaches, see  Galton 1997.