 The neo-Fregean revival had its origin in an insight of Charles Parsons (see Parsons 1965: 183 and 194). He pointed out that what he called principle (A) below suffices, given the structure of Frege’s argumentation in the Grundlagen, for the derivation of the axioms of Peano arithmetic. Parsons uses the binary quantifier ‘Glz’ to abbreviate “gleichzahlig” (equinumerous), and uses Nx to abbreviate “the number of”: (A) NxFx = NxGx ≡ Glzx(Fx,Gx). … we can put [Frege’s procedure] in the form of defining Peano’s three primitives ‘0’, ‘natural number’ and ‘successor’, and proving Peano’s axioms. … it is not necessary to use any axioms of set existence except in introducing terms of the form ‘NxFx’ and in proving (A), so that the argument could be carried out by taking (A) as an axiom. This is nowadays called ‘Frege’s  Theorem’.[33]  Frege’s Theorem has Principle (A) as its hypothesis. Curiously, the stress Frege places, in the Grundlagen, on the importance of this principle (that two concepts have the same number just in case they are gleichzahlig) is dissipated in the Grundgesetze, where the two halves of the biconditional appear widely separated: in §53 Frege proves that if two concepts correspond 1–1, then their numbers are identical, and in §69 he proves the converse. But nowhere in the Grundgesetze does he re-assemble the biconditional and accord it prime philosophical importance. Had he done so, he might well have become the first neo-Fregean in response to Russell’s Paradox. In order to do so, however, he would have had to overcome his reluctance to view (A) as a logical  axiom.[34] The neo-Fregean movement seeks to reveal that a significant amount of mathematics is analytic. This is a stronger claim than that it is a priori and derives no part of its justification from empirical science, or even from successful applications within the empirical sciences. For that would hold of mathematics (or indeed any other branch of knowledge) conceived of as synthetic a priori. The neo-Fregean maintains in addition that significant parts of mathematics flow logically from principles that are analytic of (or definitional of) their central concepts or predicates, such as ‘natural number’ or ‘real number’. That is, they flow from the very meanings of those central predicates. (We opt here for the linguistic version of the analyticity claim). Note the stress here on ‘significant  parts’.[35]  We know from Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem that any consistent and sufficiently strong theory of arithmetic is unable to prove or refute (the formalized statement of) its own consistency. The latter statement is true, but unprovable. In light of the incompleteness phenomena, one would be hard pressed to make good on the claim that all mathematical truths are true by virtue only of such logical considerations as can be captured in systems of formal  proof.[36]  When the first principles of a mathematical theory, such as arithmetic, form an essentially incomplete axiomatization, the logicist will have to maintain that the justification of any new first principle can be furnished in some strictly logical sense. Note that the foregoing remarks describe the general context for a neo-Fregean revival of logicism of any kind. They do not dictate the exact form of any such revival. In  §3  we discuss the particular form of the revival that involves extending second-order logic with Hume’s Principle; and in  §4,  we discuss constructive logicism. These two forms of neo-Fregean revival of logicism share the following three important features with Frege’s own treatment. First, the number 0 (zero) is still defined as the number of any empty concept: in particular, as the number of non-self-identical things (formally: #x ¬x = x). Secondly, once the existence of any natural number n is secured, that of its successor, s(n), is secured by taking s(n) to be the number of all natural numbers from 0 to n, inclusive (Frege’s trick). Thirdly, the definition of the concept of natural number exploits the notion of the ancestral of the relation of succession: x bears the succession-ancestral relation to y just in case y is at most finitely many steps of succession away from x. (As already made clear, any apparent circularity in this definition, deriving from the adverbial gloss ‘finitely’, turns out, upon closer inspection of the definitions used, to be just that: merely apparent.) The concept “z is a natural number” is then defined as “either 0 is z, or 0 bears the succession-ancestral relation to z”. And this is what allows the neo-Fregean logicist to derive the principle of mathematical induction for the natural numbers. The reader of this survey article will be spared the formal details.