 1881 February 27, born in Overschie (since 1941 part of Rotterdam), The Netherlands. 1897 Enters the University of Amsterdam to study mathematics and physics. 1904 Obtains doctorandus title (MSc degree) in mathematics; first publication (on rotations in four dimensional space); marries Lize de Holl (born 1870). They would have no children, but Lize had a daughter from an earlier marriage. They move to Blaricum, near Amsterdam, where they would live for the rest of their lives, although they also had houses in other places. 1904–1907 Doctoral studies. His mathematical and philosophical notebooks towards his dissertation show strong influence from notably Cantor, Hilbert, Russell, Poincaré, and Couturat. He is aware of the Frege–Hilbert debate, and in that matter sides with Frege. Some remarks betray a form of anti-semitism that, unfortunately, often appeared in language at the time, as codification of a common prejudice; an occasional remark goes further and contrasts Jewish people unfavourably to Germanic ones. No such utterances are known from other periods in his life; compare also the entries for 1934–1935 and 1940–1945 below. There is no meaningful connection between this fleeting anti-semitism and the philosophical views on mathematics, language, and society he set out in his dissertation and developed over the rest of his life. 1907 Obtains doctor title with dissertation On the Foundations of Mathematics, under supervision of Korteweg at the University of Amsterdam. (The original Dutch title of the dissertation was ‘Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde’. The present entry will for the most part refer to works cited by using the titles of English translations, with the bibliography providing information about the original publications.) It marks the beginning of his intuitionistic reconstruction of mathematics. Later that year, Brouwer’s wife graduates and becomes a pharmacist. All his life, Brouwer did the bookkeeping for her and filled out the tax forms, and sometimes he assisted behind the counter. 1908 First publication of his argument against the general validity of the Principle of the Excluded Middle in “The unreliability of the logical principles”. First participation in an international conference, the Fourth International Conference of Mathematicians in Rome. 1909–1913 In a very productive four years, Brouwer founds modern topology, as a chapter of classical mathematics. Highlights: invariance of dimension, fixed point theorem, mapping degree, definition of dimension. As van Dalen (2005, p. 450) observes, Brouwer’s definition of dimension seems to be the first reformulation of an inductive definition as a game. A pause in his intuitionistic program. 1909 Becomes privaatdocent (unpaid lecturer) at the University of Amsterdam. Inaugural lecture “The Nature of Geometry”. 1909 Meets Hilbert in the Dutch seaside resort of Scheveningen. Brouwer much admires Hilbert and describes their meeting in a letter to a friend as “a beautiful new ray of light through my life” (Brouwer & Adama van Scheltema, 1984, p. 100). Twenty years later, Brouwer’s relation with Hilbert would turn sour. 1911 First appearance of the names “formalism” and “intuitionism” in Brouwer’s writings, in a review of Mannoury’s Methodological and philosophical remarks on elementary mathematics (1909). 1912 Elected member of the Royal Academy of Sciences (during World War II “Dutch Academy of Sciences”, afterward “Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences”). 1912 Appointed full professor extraordinarius in the field of set theory, function theory, and axiomatics. His philosophical inaugural lecture “Intuïtionisme en Formalisme” is translated into English as “Intuitionism and Formalism” and thus becomes, in 1913, the first publication on intuitionism in that language. 1913 Appointed full professor ordinarius, succeeding Korteweg, who had generously offered to vacate his chair for the purpose. 1914 Invited to join the editorial board of the Mathematische Annalen; accepts the honour. 1918 Brouwer begins the systematic intuitionistic reconstruction of mathematics with his paper “Founding Set Theory Independently of the Principle of the Excluded Middle. Part One, General Set Theory”. 1919 Receives offers for professorships in Göttingen and in Berlin; declines both. 1919 “Intuitionistic Set Theory” is the first piece of intuitionistic mathematics in a widely read international journal, the Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker Vereinigung. 1920 Start of the “Grundlagenstreit” (Foundational Debate) with Brouwer’s lecture at the “Naturforscherversammlung” in Bad Nauheim, published in 1921, “Does Every Real Number Have a Decimal Expansion?”; the debate was amplified by Weyl’s defence of intuitionism in 1921, “On the New Foundational Crisis of Mathematics”; Hilbert responds in 1922, “The New Grounding of Mathematics”. 1922 Co-founds, with Gerrit Mannoury, the man of letters  Frederik van Eeden, and others, the “Signific Circle”,  aiming at spiritual and political progress through language reform. The Circle ends its meetings in 1926, but Mannoury continues its work. 1926 Lecture in Göttingen; as a result of a group dinner at Emmy Noether’s house, Hilbert and Brouwer are (for a brief period) on good terms again. 1927 Lecture series in Berlin; Hans Reichenbach and André Weil are in the audience, as is Brouwer’s later assistant Hans Freudenthal. The newspaper Berliner Tageblatt proposes a public debate between Brouwer and Hilbert, to be held in its pages, but for some reason this is not realised. Neither does Brouwer complete the book he is invited to write by the German publisher Walter de Gruyter. The lectures and an incomplete book are published posthumously (Brouwer, 1992). 1928 March 10 and 14: two lectures in Vienna. Gödel is in the audience, as is Wittgenstein. It is said that the first lecture made Wittgenstein return to philosophy. Brouwer spends a day with Wittgenstein. 1928 April: conversations with Husserl, who is in Amsterdam to lecture. 1928 Conflict over the Bologna conference. The German mathematicians are, for the first time since the ending of World War I, admitted to an international conference again, but not quite as equals. Brouwer insists that this is not fair, and that the conference should therefore be boycotted. Hilbert, who does not share this view, is much chagrined by Brouwer’s action and attends the conference as the leader of the German delegation, the largest present. 1928–1929 “Mathematische Annalenstreit”, the conflict in the editorial board of Mathematische Annalen. Hilbert, thinking he is about to die, feels a need to make sure that after his death Brouwer will not become too influential, and expels him from the board in an unlawful way. (Hilbert’s motivation as described here is documented in letters from people close to him: Carathéodory to Einstein, October 20, 1928; Blumenthal to the publisher and editors of the Mathematische Annalen, November 16, 1928; Born to Einstein, November 20, 1928. Copies of these letters are in the Brouwer Papers  at the Noord-Hollands Archief in Haarlem.  Relevant quotations from these can be found in van Dalen, 2005, p. 604 and p. 613.) Einstein, also member of the board, refuses to support Hilbert’s action and does not want to have anything to do with the whole affair; most other board members do not want to irritate Hilbert by opposing him. Brouwer vehemently protests. In the end, the whole board is dissolved and immediately reassembled without Brouwer, in a strongly reduced size (in particular, Einstein and Carathéodory decline). The conflict leaves Brouwer mentally broken and isolated, and puts an end to a very creative decade in his work. Now that the two main contestants are no longer able to carry it on, the “Grundlagenstreit” is over. 1928–1930 Conflict with Karl Menger over the priority for the first correct definition of the notion of dimension. 1929 August: theft of Brouwer’s briefcase on the tram in Brussels, and with it of his mathematical notebook. When neither the police nor a private detective hired for the purpose is able to find it again, he despairs of ever being able to reconstruct its contents. Brouwer later said that this loss was instrumental in the shift of his main interest from mathematics to philosophy. 1929 Begins preparations for the foundation of a new mathematical journal. 1934 Appearance of the first issue of Brouwer’s own international journal, entitled Compositio Mathematica. 1934 Lecture series in Geneva, on invitation of Ferdinand Gonseth. Plans for a course on intuitionistic mathematics in Göttingen come very far, but are, in the end, not realised. 1934–1935 Ludwig Bieberbach, a German member of the editorial board of Compositio Mathematica who in 1933 had joined the National Socialist movement by entering the SA, asks Brouwer to remove the Jewish members from that board.  Brouwer refuses; Bieberbach resigns. 1935–1941 Member of the municipal council of Blaricum for the local Neutral Party (in 1939 he wins the elections by receiving 310 of the 1601 votes). 1940–1945 During the German Occupation of the Netherlands in World War II, Brouwer assists the resistance by letting them use storage space in the Mathematical Institute, of which he was the director. He offers hiding places to Jews and other persecuted persons in small houses on his premises (as testified by a neighbour’s daughter, herself involved in these operations, in van Dalen 2005, vol. 2, p. 772–773). In 1943, he advises the students to sign the declaration of loyalty demanded by the Germans; when some students refuse and go into hiding, Brouwer and Heyting visit them to continue their education. Part of Brouwer’s explanation, after the war, for the advice to sign is that signing would provide the students with the relative peace needed to build up and carry out resistance activities. He is met with skepticism (but is supported by Mannoury). Because of this and some similar perhaps unfortunate attempts at shrewdness during the occupation, after the liberation he is suspended for a few months. Deeply offended, Brouwer considers emigration to South Africa or the USA. 1941 and 1944 Fires in Brouwer’s house destroy significant parts of his archives and library. 1942 Publishes three short notes again on intuitionistic foundations, the first since 1933. 1945–1950 Conflict over Compositio Mathematica. The journal had not appeared during the war, and an effort is made to bring it back to life. Difficulties in assembling a new board of editors arise because of Brouwer’s damaged reputation. In the end, Brouwer’s name remains on the title page, but in effect he is removed from the board of the journal he had founded. 1947–1951 Annual lecture series in Cambridge, England. Brouwer plans to turn them into a book, but this does not happen. However, he completes five of the planned six chapters, and these are published poshumously (Brouwer, 1981). 1948 Resumes his foundational program with a paper that exploits the notion of the creating subject. Beginning of another creative period. 1949 Opposes a plan to have his collected papers published, on the ground that he has no time to write annotations that reflect his original as well as his present views on them, which he considers would be the scientifically responsible thing to do. 1951 Retires from the University of Amsterdam. Cooling off of his relationship with Arend Heyting, his successor at the post of director of the Mathematical Institute, as a result of disagreement over the exact role the retired Brouwer could still play there. 1952 Lectures in London and in Cape Town. 1953 Lectures in Helsinki, where he stays with Von Wright. Lecture tour through the USA (among others MIT, Princeton, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Berkeley, Chicago) and Canada (Canadian Mathematical Congress in Kingston, Ontario). In Princeton, he visits Gödel. 1955 Publishes his last new paper (based on his lecture at the Boole conference in Dublin the year before). 1959 Death of Mrs Brouwer, 89 years old. Brouwer declines an offer for a 1-year position at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver. 1962 Brouwer is offered a position in Montana. 1966 December 2: dies in Blaricum, The Netherlands, 85 years old, when he is hit by a car in front of his house. His library and archives are dispersed. Beginning in the 1970s,  Walter van Stigt and Dirk van Dalen reconstitute the archives as much as possible; the Brouwer Papers are now kept at the Noord-Hollands Archief in Haarlem.