 Signification contrasts with the other properties of terms in one major respect, for the other properties (perhaps with the exception of appellation in some authors, and natural supposition) are all properties of terms relative to their occurrence in particular propositions – indeed, they are properties of occurrences of  terms.[7]  Signification, however, is independent of a term's particular uses or occurrences: “Signification differs from supposition in this that signification is prior to supposition” (Lambert, tr. Maloney, p.  254).[8]  Indeed, the other properties are dependent on the signification of the term. For example, an occurrence of a term can only supposit personally (see  section 3)  for certain objects in virtue of its signifying them, among others, or signifying some property they share. A twelfth-century commentary on the Perihermeneias reports Porphyry as saying that at the time of Aristotle, there was a great debate over the principal signification of utterances: was it ‘res’ (things) or incorporeal natures (Plato) or sensus (sensations) or imaginationes (representations) or intellectus  (concepts)?[9]  In fact, medieval philosophers of language were heir to two conflicting semantic theories. According to Aristotle, the greatest authority from the ancient world, words name things by signifying concepts in the mind (Boethius translated Aristotle's term as passiones animae – affections of the soul) which are likenesses abstracted from them. But Augustine, the greatest of the Church fathers, had held that words signify things by means of those  concepts.[10]  This led the medievals to the question: do words signify concepts or things? The question had already been asked by Alexander of Aphrodisias and his answer was transmitted to the medievals in Boethius' second commentary on Aristotle's Perihermeneias (De Interpretatione): “Alexander asks, if they are the names of things, why has Aristotle said that spoken sounds are in the first place signs of thoughts … But perhaps, he says, he puts it this way because although spoken sounds are the names of things we do not use spoken sounds to signify things, but [to signify] affections of the soul that are produced in us by the things. Then in view of what spoken sounds themselves are used to signify he was right to say they are primarily signs of them” (tr. Smith, pp.  36–37).[11]  So words primarily signify concepts. But the matter was not settled, other than that whatever view a medieval philosopher took, it had to be made to accord with the authority of Aristotle, perhaps in extremis by reinterpreting Aristotle's words. Abelard refers to a distinction between significatio intellectuum (signification of concepts) and significatio rei (signification of the thing), more properly called nomination or appellation (see De Rijk, Logica Modernorum, vol. II(1), pp. 192–5). Similarly, the Tractatus de proprietatibus sermonum asks whether words signify concepts or things, and responds: both (intellectum et rem), but primarily a thing via a concept as medium (op.cit. II (2), p. 707). A particular novelty of the thirteenth century, however, was to conceive of the concept itself as a sign. We find this in Lambert of Auxerre: “The signification of a term is the concept of a thing, for which concept of a thing (intellectus rei) a vocal sound is imposed at the will of the one instituting it, for, as Aristotle proposes in Book One of On Interpretation vocal sounds are signs of affections (passiones) that are in a soul, that is, in an intellect, whereas concepts are signs of things” (tr. Maloney, p.  253).[12]  Hence by transitivity, utterances which are signs of concepts which are signs of things are themselves signs of things: “A vocal sign that is a sign of a sign … [will be directly] a sign of the concept and indirectly a sign of the thing” (tr. Maloney, p.  254).[13]  For example, ‘man’ immediately signifies the concept man, but by mediation of the concept it signifies the second substance or form of man. Accordingly, it can supposit for what fall under man, e.g., Plato and Socrates. But it does not signify Plato or Socrates. As noted above, this last distinction was elided by Ockham, in making the mental act the universal, a name of the things. ‘Man’, he says, signifies Plato and Socrates and all men equally, by virtue of its subordination to the mental act. Once signification is treated extensionally in this way, its only difference from supposition lies in its priority: a general term signifies all those things of which it can be truly predicated (Ockham, Summa Logicae I c. 33).