 Mental imagery is a familiar aspect of most people's everyday experience (Galton, 1880a,b, 1883; Betts, 1909; Doob, 1972; Marks, 1972, 1999). A few people may insist that they rarely, or even never, consciously experience imagery (Galton, 1880a, 1883; Faw, 1997, 2009; but see Brewer & Schommer-Aikins, 2006), but for the vast majority of us, it is a familiar and commonplace feature of our mental lives. The English language supplies quite a range of idiomatic ways of referring to visual mental imagery: ‘visualizing,’ ‘seeing in the mind's eye,’ ‘having a picture in one's head,’ ‘picturing,’ ‘having/seeing a mental image/picture,’ and so on. There seem to be fewer ways to talk about imagery in other sensory modes, but there is little doubt that it occurs, and the experiencing of imagery in any sensory mode is often referred to as ‘imagining’ (the appearance, feel, smell, sound, or flavor of something). Alternatively, the quasi-perceptual nature of an experience may be indicated merely by putting the relevant sensory verb (‘see,’ ‘hear,’ ‘taste,’ etc.) in actual or implied “scare quotes.” Despite the familiarity of the experience, the precise meaning of the expression ‘mental imagery’ is remarkably hard to pin  down, and differing understandings of it have often added  considerably to the confusion of the already complex and fractious  debates, amongst philosophers, psychologists, and cognitive  scientists, concerning imagery's nature, its psychological functions  (if any), and even its very existence. In the philosophical and  scientific literature (and a fortiori in everyday  discourse), the expression ‘mental imagery’ (or  ‘mental images’) may be used in any or all of at least  three different senses, which are only occasionally explicitly  distinguished, and all too often conflated: Far too many discussions of visual mental imagery fail to draw a  clear distinction between the contention that people have  quasi-visual experiences and the contention that such experiences are to be explained by the presence of representations, in the mind or  brain, that are in some sense picture-like. This picture theory (or pictorial theory) of imagery experience is  deeply entrenched in our language and our folk psychology. The very  word ‘image,’ after all, suggests a picture. However,  although the majority of both laymen and experts probably continue to accept some form of picture theory, many 20th century philosophers  and psychologists, from a variety of theoretical traditions, have  argued strongly against it, and, in several cases they have developed quite detailed alternative, non-pictorial accounts of the nature and  causes of imagery experiences (e.g., Dunlap, 1914; Washburn, 1916;  Sartre, 1940; Ryle, 1949; Shorter, 1952; Skinner, 1953, 1974;  Dennett, 1969; Sarbin & Juhasz, 1970; Sarbin, 1972; Pylyshyn,  1973, 1978, 1981, 2002a, 2003a, 2005; Neisser, 1976; Hinton, 1979;  Slezak, 1991, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2009). Others, it should be said, have  developed and defended picture theory in sophisticated ways in the  attempt to meet these critiques (e.g., Hannay, 1971; Kosslyn, 1980,  1983,1994; von Eckardt, 1988, 1993; Tye, 1988, 1991; Cohen, 1996).  However, despite these developments, much philosophical and  scientific discussion about imagery and the cognitive functions it  may or may not serve continues to be based on the often unspoken (and  even unexamined) assumption that, if there is mental imagery at all,  it must consist in inner pictures. Consider, for example, the title of the book The Case for Mental Imagery, by Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis (2006). In fact the book is an extended and quite polemical defense of the much disputed view that visual mental imagery consists in representational brain states that are, in some significant and important ways, genuinely picture-like (see supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems). That is to say, the contents suggest that the title should be understood as intending "imagery" in sense {2}. However, it would also be very natural (and, very possibly, in accord with the authors' intentions – compare Kosslyn, Ganis & Thompson, 2003) to understand the title as implying that the book's deeper purpose is to refute the view that imagery, even in sense {1}, does not really exist (or, at least, that the concept of imagery will find no place in a properly scientific ontology). Although this denialist view of imagery has few, if any, supporters today, it is well known that not so very long ago, in the era of Behaviorist psychology, it had great influence.  The book's title thus (intentionally or otherwise) invites us to conflate the (now) very controversial view that mental images are picture-like entities, with what is, today, the virtual truism that people really do have quasi-perceptual experiences, and that our science of the mind owes us some account of them. Another way in which the expression ‘mental imagery’ (together with many of its colloquial near-equivalents) may be misleading, is that it tends to suggest only quasi-visual phenomena. Despite the fact that most scholarly discussions of imagery, in the past and today, do indeed focus mainly or exclusively upon the visual mode, in fact, quasi-perceptual experience in other sensory modes is just as real, and, very likely, just as common and just as psychologically important (Newton, 1982). Contemporary cognitive scientists generally recognize this, and interesting studies of auditory imagery, kinaesthetic (or motor) imagery, olfactory imagery, haptic (touch) imagery, and so forth, can be found in the recent scientific literature (e.g., Segal & Fusella, 1971; Reisberg, 1992; Klatzky, Lederman, & Matula, 1991; Jeannerod, 1994; Bensafi et al., 2003; Yoo et al., 2003; Kobayashi et al., 2004; Djordjevic et al., 2004, 2005). Although such studies are still vastly outnumbered by studies of visual imagery, ‘imagery’ has become the generally accepted term amongst cognitive scientists for quasi-perceptual experience in any sense mode (or any combination of sense modes). In the introduction to this entry, in order to avoid making a  premature commitment to the picture theory, and in accordance with  definitions given by psychologists such as McKellar (1957),  Richardson (1969), and Finke (1989), mental imagery was characterized as a form of experience (i.e., as {1}). However,  this itself is far from unproblematic. Evidence for the occurrence of any experience is necessarily subjective and introspective, and,  because of this, those who have doubts about the validity of  introspection as a scientific method, may well be led to question  whether there is any place for a concept such as imagery within a  truly scientific world view. J.B. Watson, the influential instigator  of the Behaviorist movement that dominated scientific psychology  (especially in the United States) for much of the 20th century,  questioned the very existence of imagery for just these sorts of  reasons (Watson, 1913a, 1913b, 1928 –   see supplement; see also:  Thomas, 1989, Berman & Lyons, 2007). Although few later Behaviorist psychologists (or their philosophical allies) expressed themselves on the matter in quite the strong and explicit terms sometimes used by Watson, the era of Behaviorist psychology is characterized by a marked skepticism about imagery (if not its existence, at least its psychological importance) amongst both psychologists and philosophers. Imagery did not become widely discussed again among scientific psychologists (or philosophers of psychology) until around the end of the 1960s, when Behaviorism began to be displaced by Cognitivism as the dominant psychological paradigm. Most informed contemporary discussions of imagery, amongst both philosophers and psychologists, are still very much shaped by this recent history of skepticism about imagery (or iconophobia, as it is sometimes called), and the subsequent  reaction against it. By contrast with their Behaviorist predecessors, most cognitive psychologists today hold that imagery has an essential role to play in our mental economy. Many may share some of the reservations of their Behaviorist predecessors about the place of introspection and subjectivity in science, but they take the view that imagery must be real (and scientifically interesting) because it is explanatorily necessary: The results of many experiments on cognitive functioning, they hold, cannot be satisfactorily explained without making appeal to the storage and processing of imaginal mental representations. The belief that such mental representations are real is justified in the same sort of way that belief in the reality of electrons, or natural selection, or gravitational fields (or other scientifically sanctioned “unobservables”) is justified: Imagery is known to exist inasmuch as the explanations that rely upon imaginal representations are known to be true. From this perspective, some theorists recommend that the term ‘imagery’ should not be understood to refer to a form of subjective experience, but, rather, to a certain type of “underlying representation” (Dennett, 1978; Block, 1981a, Introduction; Block, 1983a; Kosslyn, 1983; Wraga & Kosslyn, 2003; Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis, 2006). Such representations are “mental” in the sense now commonplace in cognitive science: i.e., they are conceived of as being embodied as brain states, but as individuated by their functional (and computational) role in cognition. As Block (1981a, 1983a) points out, an advantage of defining mental imagery in this way (i.e., as an unspecified form of representation, as {3} rather than {2}) is that it  does not beg the controversial question of whether the relevant  representations are, in any interesting sense, picture-like. However, if it is not because they are picture-like, what is it that  makes these mental representations mental images? Presumably the idea is that a mental representation deserves to be called an  image if it is of such a type that its presence to mind (i.e., its  playing a role in some currently occurring cognitive process) can  give rise to a quasi-perceptual experience of whatever is represented.  But this move relies upon our already having a grasp of the  experiential conception of imagery, which must, therefore, be more  fundamental than the representational conception just  outlined. Furthermore, to define imagery in the way that  Block, Kosslyn etc. suggest, as first and foremost a form of  representation (as explanans rather than  explanandum), is to beg more basic and equally controversial questions about the nature of the mind and the causes of quasi-perceptual experiences. A number of scientists and philosophers, coming from a diverse range of disciplinary and theoretical perspectives, do not accept that imagery experiences are caused by the presence to mind of representational tokens (e.g., Sartre, 1940; Ryle, 1949; Skinner, 1953, 1974; Sarbin, 1972; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; O'Regan & Noë, 2001; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bennett & Hacker, 2003; Blain, 2006). It should be admitted, however, that focusing too narrowly on the  experiential conception of imagery has its own potential  dangers. In particular, it may obscure the very real possibility,  foregrounded by the representational conception, that  importantly similar underlying representations or mechanisms may  sometimes be operative both when we consciously experience imagery  and sometimes when we do not. Some evidence, such as Paivio's (1971,  1983a, 1991a) work on the differential memorability of words with  different “imagery values” (see  section 4.2,  below), suggests that this is indeed the case. In practice, both the experiential and the representational  conceptions of imagery are frequently encountered in the literature  of the subject. Unfortunately, it is often hard to tell which is  intended in any particular case. Even where they are not actually  conflated, confusion can arise when one conception is favored over  the other without this ever being made sufficiently clear or  explicit. Although it would be pedantic and potentially confusing to  insist on explicitly drawing the distinction everywhere, where it  seems important or helpful to do so this entry will refer to  imagery experiences (or quasi-perceptual  experiences) on the one hand, and imagery  representations (or imagery processes) on the other. There are further potential problems, however, with the brief  characterization of imagery given in our introduction. Not only does  what is said there duck the difficult (and rarely considered) task of specifying what dimensions and degrees of similarity to perception  are necessary for an experience to count as imagery; it also elides  the controversial question of whether, despite the surface  resemblance, imagery is a sui generis phenomenon,  conceptually quite distinct from true perceptual experience, or  whether imagery and perception differ only in degree rather than in  kind. Some, such as Hume (1740), hold that percepts (impressions in his terminology) and images (ideas) do not differ in kind, but only in their degree of “vivacity”or vividness. This view has frequently been criticized, however (Reid, 1764 II.5, VI.24; Savage, 1975; Warnock, 1976; McGinn, 2004). A related view, explicitly defended by some (e.g., Jastrow, 1899; Savage, 1975; Thomas, 1997a, 2014), and implicit in much of the other relevant literature, is that imagery, regardless of its subjective “vividness”, lies at one end of a continuum or spectrum stretching from veridical, highly stimulus-driven and stimulus-constrained perception at one end, to “pure” imagery (where the content of the experience is generated entirely by the subject, and is quite independent of any current stimulus input) at the other.  Several varieties of imaginative preceptual experience may be taken to fill in the continuum between these extremes: mistaken or illusive perceptions (imagining, for instance, that the bush seen indistinctly in the darkness is a bear), and various types of non-deceptive seeing as or seeing in (such as imagining a cloud to have the shape of a camel, weasel, or whale; seeing a Laughing Cavalier in paint on canvas; seeing someone's sadness in their eyes; or seeing the notorious duck-rabbit figure as a duck [or rabbit]). Figure 1.2_1 The Duck-Rabbit Others, however, notably Reid (1764 II.5), Sartre (1936), Wittgenstein (1967 §621 ff.), McGinn (2004) and Ichikawa (2009), argue that there is a sharp conceptual and phenomenological distinction to be drawn between imagery and perception proper. After all, it is argued, our imagination, unlike our perception, is under the control of our will (and experienced as such). Provided I know what an elephant looks like, I can choose to imagine one wherever and whenever I want to, but I cannot choose to see an elephant unless one actually happens to be present.  By contrast, if an elephant is present before my open eyes, I cannot help but see it, whether I will or  no.[1]  McGinn (2004) restates this argument with considerably more rigor and detail than his predecessors did, and, in addition, sets out eight further arguments that, he thinks, point to the same conclusion, viz, that mental imagery is a phenomenon radically conceptually different in kind from perception. If true, this would appear to imply that all extant scientific theories about the nature and mechanisms of imagery (see §§4.4-4.5, below), and (to the best of my knowledge) all obsolete theories too (see §§2-3 below) must be false, as all of them depend on the assumption that mental images and percepts differ in degree rather than kind, and that there is a large degree of overlap between the respective mechanisms that give rise to each. However, although all or most of the differences between images and percepts pointed out by McGinn (and Reid, Sartre and Wittgenstein), are probably real enough, the claim that any of them reflect true differences in kind, rather than degree, is on much shakier ground. Taking on McGinn’s (and Ichikawa's) arguments in detail, Thomas (2014), defends the notion of a spectrum or continuum of imaginative phenomena that encompasses not only veridical perception and mental imagery, but also such things as dreams, hallucinations, pareidolia, and various other types of both deceptive and non-deceptive “imaginative perceiving”. Sartre (1940) and Wittgenstein (1967 §§627, 632) also argue that (in sharp contrast to perception) we can derive no new information about the world from our imagery: No image can contain anything except what the imager put there, which must already have been in his or her mind. However, not only observation, but also inference can lead to knowledge, and it has been argued that mental imagery can and does support certain types of inference that give us genuinely new knowledge about the real world (Kosslyn, 1980, 1983; Taylor, 1981, Georgiou, 2007; Thomas,  2014).[2]  McGinn, however, (2004 p. 19ff) argues that although Sartre and Wittgenstein overstate their point, there is a genuine and important insight underlying what they say: The information we can derive from our imagery is of a different sort, and is derived in a different way, from that which we get from perception. On a more consensual note, with only rare exceptions (e.g. Wright, 1983; Martin, 2008 p. 160) nearly all serious discussions of imagery take it for granted that it bears intentionality in the sense of being of, about, or directed at something (Harman, 1998): A mental image is always an image of something or other (whether real or unreal), in the same sense that perception (whether veridical or not) is always perception of something (see Anscombe, 1965). It is in virtue of this intentionality that mental imagery may be (and usually is) regarded as a species of mental representation that can, and often does, play an important role in our thought processes. It is also generally accepted that imagery is, for the most part,  subject to voluntary control. Although it is true that images often  come into the mind unbidden, and sometimes it is hard to shake off  unwanted imagery (for instance, a memory of some horrible sight that  one cannot get out of one's mind), most of us, most of the time can  quite freely and voluntarily conjure-up and manipulate imagery of  whatever we may please (provided, of course, that we know what it  looks like). There are quasi-perceptual experiences, such as afterimages, that are not subject to this sort of direct voluntary control, and indeed, that do not seem to bear intentionality, but these are usually (at least implicitly) understood to be phenomena of a distinctly different type from mental imagery proper  (see supplement). Further discussion of phenomena akin to, or sometimes  confused with, mental imagery: