 Suppose \(L\) is a language of signature \(K, T\) is a set of sentences of \(L\) and \(\phi\) is a sentence of \(L\). Then the relation expresses that every structure of signature \(K\) which is a model of \(T\) is also a model of \(\phi\). This is known as the model-theoretic consequence relation, and it is written for short as The double use of \(\vDash\) is a misfortune. But in the particular case where \(L\) is first-order, the completeness theorem (see the entry on  classical logic)  tells us that ‘\(T \vDash \phi\)’ holds if and only if there is a proof of \(\phi\) from \(T\), a relation commonly written Since \(\vDash\) and \(\vdash\) express exactly the same relation in this case, model theorists often avoid the double use of \(\vDash\) by using \(\vdash\) for model-theoretic consequence. But since what follows is not confined to first-order languages, safety suggests we stick with \(\vDash\) here. Before the middle of the nineteenth century, textbooks of logic commonly taught the student how to check the validity of an argument (say in English) by showing that it has one of a number of standard forms, or by paraphrasing it into such a form. The standard forms were syntactic and/or semantic forms of argument in English. The process was hazardous: semantic forms are almost by definition not visible on the surface, and there is no purely syntactic form that guarantees validity of an argument. For this reason most of the old textbooks had a long section on ‘fallacies’ – ways in which an invalid argument may seem to be valid. In 1847 George Boole changed this arrangement. For example, to validate the argument Boole would interpret the symbols \(P, Q, R\) as names of classes: Then he would point out that the original argument paraphrases into a set-theoretic consequence: (This example is from Stanley Jevons, 1869. Boole’s own account is idiosyncratic, but I believe Jevons’ example represents Boole’s intentions accurately.) Today we would write \(\forall x(Px \rightarrow Qx)\) rather than \(P \subseteq Q\), but this is essentially the standard definition of \(P \subseteq Q\), so the difference between us and Boole is slight. Insofar as they follow Boole, modern textbooks of logic establish that English arguments are valid by reducing them to model-theoretic consequences. Since the class of model-theoretic consequences, at least in first-order logic, has none of the vaguenesses of the old argument forms, textbooks of logic in this style have long since ceased to have a chapter on fallacies. But there is one warning that survives from the old textbooks: If you formalise your argument in a way that is not a model-theoretic consequence, it doesn’t mean the argument is not valid. It may only mean that you failed to analyse the concepts in the argument deeply enough before you formalised. The old textbooks used to discuss this in a ragbag section called ‘topics’ (i.e. hints for finding arguments that you might have missed). Here is an example from Peter of Spain’s 13th century Summulae Logicales: Hilbert and Ackermann, possibly the textbook that did most to establish the modern style, discuss in their section III.3 a very similar example: ‘If there is a son, then there is a father’. They point out that any attempt to justify this by using the symbolism is doomed to failure. “A proof of this statement is possible only if we analyze conceptually the meanings of the two predicates which occur”, as they go on to illustrate. And of course the analysis finds precisely the relation that Peter of Spain referred to. On the other hand if your English argument translates into an invalid model-theoretic consequence, a counterexample to the consequence may well give clues about how you can describe a situation that would make the premises of your argument true and the conclusion false. But this is not guaranteed. One can raise a number of questions about whether the modern textbook procedure does really capture a sensible notion of logical consequence. For example in Boole’s case the set-theoretic consequences that he relies on are all easily provable by formal proofs in first-order logic, not even using any set-theoretic axioms; and by the completeness theorem (see the entry on  classical logic)  the same is true for first-order logic. But for some other logics it is certainly not true. For instance the model-theoretic consequence relation for some logics of time presupposes some facts about the physical structure of time. Also, as Boole himself pointed out, his translation from an English argument to its set-theoretic form requires us to believe that for every property used in the argument, there is a corresponding class of all the things that have the property. This comes dangerously close to Frege’s inconsistent comprehension axiom! In 1936 Alfred Tarski proposed a definition of logical consequence for arguments in a fully interpreted formal language. His proposal was that an argument is valid if and only if: under any allowed reinterpretation of its nonlogical symbols, if the premises are true then so is the conclusion. Tarski assumed that the class of allowed reinterpretations could be read off from the semantics of the language, as set out in his  truth definition.  He left it undetermined what symbols count as nonlogical; in fact he hoped that this freedom would allow one to define different kinds of necessity, perhaps separating ‘logical’ from ‘analytic’. One thing that makes Tarski’s proposal difficult to evaluate is that he completely ignores the question we discussed above, of analysing the concepts to reach all the logical connections between them. The only plausible explanation I can see for this lies in his parenthetical remark about This suggests to me that he wants his primitive signs to be by stipulation unanalysable. But then by stipulation it will be purely accidental if his notion of logical consequence captures everything one would normally count as a logical consequence. Historians note a resemblance between Tarski’s proposal and one in section 147 of Bernard Bolzano’s Wissenschaftslehre of 1837. Like Tarski, Bolzano defines the validity of a proposition in terms of the truth of a family of related propositions. Unlike Tarski, Bolzano makes his proposal for propositions in the vernacular, not for sentences of a formal language with a precisely defined semantics. On all of this section, see also the entry on  logical consequence.