 People often behave in ways that benefit others, and they sometimes do this knowing that it will be costly, unpleasant or dangerous. But at least since Plato’s classic discussion in the second Book of the Republic, debate has raged over why people behave in this way. Are their motives altruistic, or is their behavior ultimately motivated by self-interest? Famously, Hobbes gave this answer: No man giveth but with intention of good to himself, because gift is voluntary; and of all voluntary acts, the object is to every man his own good; of which, if men see they shall be frustrated, there will be no beginning of benevolence or trust, nor consequently of mutual help. (1651 [1981: Ch. 15]) Views like Hobbes’ have come to be called  egoism,[14]  and this rather depressing conception of human motivation has any number of eminent philosophical advocates, including Bentham, J.S. Mill and  Nietzsche.[15]  Dissenting voices, though perhaps fewer in number, have been no less eminent. Butler, Hume, Rousseau and Adam Smith have all argued that, sometimes at least, human motivation is genuinely altruistic. Though the issue that divides egoistic and altruistic accounts of human motivation is largely empirical, it is easy to see why philosophers have thought that the competing answers will have important consequences for moral theory. For example, Kant famously argued that a person should act “not from inclination but from duty, and by this would his conduct first acquire true moral worth” (1785 [1949: Sec. 1, parag. 12]). But egoism maintains that all human motivation is ultimately self-interested, and thus people can’t act “from duty” in the way that Kant urged. Thus if egoism is true, Kant’s account would entail that no conduct has “true moral worth”. Additionally, if egoism is true, it would appear to impose a strong constraint on how a moral theory can answer the venerable question “Why should I be moral?” since, as Hobbes clearly saw, the answer will have to ground the motivation to be moral in the agent’s  self-interest.[16] While the egoism vs. altruism debate has historically been of great philosophical interest, the issue centrally concerns psychological questions about the nature of human motivation, so it’s not surprise that psychologists have done a great deal of empirical research aimed at determining which view is correct. Some of the most influential and philosophically sophisticated empirical work on this issue has been done by Daniel Batson and his associates. The conclusion Batson draws from this work is that people do sometimes behave altruistically, and that the emotion of empathy plays an important role in generating altruistic motivation.  [17]  Others are not convinced. For a discussion of Batson’s experiments, the conclusion he draws from them, and some reasons for skepticism about that conclusion, see sections 5 and 6 of the entry “Empirical Approaches to Altruism” in this encyclopedia. In this section, we’ll focus on some of the philosophical spadework that is necessary before plunging into the empirical literature. A crucial question that needs to be addressed is: What, exactly, is the debate about; what is altruism? Unfortunately, there is no uncontroversial answer to this question, since researchers in many disciplines, including philosophy, biology, psychology, sociology, economics, anthropology and primatology, have written about altruism, and authors in different disciplines tend to use the term “altruism” in quite different ways. Even among philosophers the term has been used with importantly different meanings. There is, however, one account of altruism—actually a cluster closely related accounts—that plays a central role both in philosophy and in a great deal of psychology, including Batson’s work. We’ll call it “the standard account”. That will be our focus in the remainder of this  section.[18] According to the standard account, an action is altruistic if it is motivated by an ultimate desire for the well-being of another person. This formulation invites questions about (1) what it is for a behavior to be motivated by an ultimate desire, and (2) the distinction between desires that are self-interested and desires that are for the well-being of others. Although the second question will need careful consideration in any comprehensive treatment, a few rough and ready examples of the distinction will suffice  here.[19]  Desires to save someone else’s life, to alleviate someone else’s suffering, or to make someone else happy are paradigm cases of desires for the well-being of others, while desires to experience pleasure, get rich, and become famous are typical examples of self-interested desires. The self-interested desires to experience pleasure and to avoid pain have played an especially prominent role in the debate, since one version of egoism, often called hedonism, maintains that these are our only ultimate desires. The first question, regarding ultimate desires, requires a fuller exposition; it can be usefully explicated with the help of a familiar account of practical  reasoning.[20]  On this account, practical reasoning is a causal process via which a desire and a belief give rise to or sustain another desire. For example, a desire to drink an espresso and a belief that the best place to get an espresso is at the espresso bar on Main Street may cause a desire to go to the espresso bar on Main Street. This desire can then join forces with another belief to generate a third desire, and so on. Sometimes this process will lead to a desire to perform a relatively simple or “basic” action, and that desire, in turn, will cause the agent to perform the basic action without the intervention of any further desires. Desires produced or sustained by this process of practical reasoning are instrumental desires—the agent has them because she thinks that satisfying them will lead to something else that she desires. But not all desires can be instrumental desires. If we are to avoid circularity or an infinite regress there must be some desires that are not produced because the agent thinks that satisfying them will facilitate satisfying some other desire. These desires that are not produced or sustained by practical reasoning are the agent’s ultimate desires, and the objects of ultimate desires, the states of affairs desired, are desired for their own sake. A behavior is motivated by a specific ultimate desire when that desire is part of the practical reasoning process that leads to the behavior. If people do sometimes have ultimate desires for the well-being of others, and these desires motivate behavior, then altruism is the correct view, and egoism is false. However, if all ultimate desires are self-interested, then egoism is the correct view, and altruism is false. The effort to establish one or the other of these options has given rise to a vast and enormously sophisticated empirical literature. For an overview of that literature, see the  empirical approaches to altruism entry.