 The principal varieties of non-cognitivism can be distinguished by focusing on the positive claims they make in explicating the semantic function of moral expressions and the nature of the mental states typically expressed by those who utter them in simple predicative statements. Emotivists think moral terms in grammatically assertive utterances function primarily to express emotion and perhaps also to elicit similar emotions in others (Barnes 1933; Stevenson 1946; Ayer 1952, Chapter 6). They can be read as suggesting that the right way to explain the meanings of such terms is to point out that they are conventional devices for performing a certain sort of speech act, one which if sincere requires that the speaker have a certain attitude. Sentences employing general predicates of positive moral evaluation such as ‘right’, ‘good’, ‘virtuous’, and so on signal a non-cognitive pro-attitude such as approval or preference. Sentences employing general predicates of negative evaluation such as ‘wrong’, ‘bad’, and ‘vicious’ signal negative non-cognitive attitudes. Thus to call a person virtuous is to express an attitude of approval and the speech act of doing so is analogous to the speech act performed when we cheer for that person. The account can be extended beyond general moral terms. Simple predicative utterances employing the so-called thick moral terms such as ‘brave’ and ‘honest’ can then be thought of as performing this same speech act while at the same time predicating the natural property (say fearlessness in the case of bravery) which common usage of the term seems to track. Thus thick moral terms can be thought of as having both descriptive and emotive meaning. Some theorists who view themselves as emotivists suggest that even the most general terms of moral evaluation have a descriptive meaning rather than just an emotive or non-cognitive meaning (Stevenson 1944, 22; Hare 1952, suggests the same sort of idea within a prescriptivist theory at 118). One such approach analyzes judgments applying a moral predicate to a particular object or action as expressing approval or disapproval of some property while at the same time predicating that property of the object or item in question. This idea has been taken over by contemporary hybrid expressivists (Jackson 1999; Barker 2000; Ridge 2006, Ridge 2014). According to these theorists, a sentence such as ‘Lying is wrong’ both predicates a property of the act type lying and expresses the speaker’s disapproval of that property. Theories of this sort will be discussed in more detail in the section on hybrid theories below.  They are mentioned here only to note two points: (1) The hybrid idea was already present in the writings of early noncognitivists. And (2) these more complicated views are often adopted by theorists who begin from simpler theories which are paradigm cases of non-cognitivism. Prescriptivists suggest that moral judgments are a species of prescriptive judgement and that moral sentences in the indicative mood are semantically more akin to imperatives than indicatives. One way to think of the idea is that moral terms function as force indicators on analogy with mood.  Early prescriptivists thought that this had radical implications for moral reasoning and argument. Carnap suggested that moral judgments are equivalent to relatively simple imperatives. The statement ‘Killing is evil’ means the same thing as ‘Do not kill.’ On that basis he claimed that there could be no moral knowledge or error (Carnap 1937; 23–24 & 29). By contrast current versions of prescriptivism, most developed in the works of R. M. Hare, have attempted to vindicate moral thinking as a rational enterprise. The main idea here is that while moral sentences do in fact express a species of prescription much as ordinary imperatives do, they express prescriptions of a special universal sort. And it is largely because they are prescriptions of this sort that they are subject to various consistency constraints, so that accepting one moral judgment carries with it a requirement that one accept other judgments in some respects like it. While Hare denies that moral judgments are exactly equivalent to prescriptions expressible in any other form of words, he does tell us a lot about what they mean. Moral imperatives are universal in a number of ways. They are to apply not just to the agent about whom they are made (if they are made with respect to a particular agent) but also to any agent who is similarly situated. And they apply to any action or object which is relevantly similar to the actions or objects about which the judgment is made. They apply to all relevantly similar cases at any time and any place. Thus, very roughly, when one calls an action right one is not only prescribing the action in question, but also any relevantly similar action wherever and whenever it occurs. And the prescription is addressed not only to the agent whose action is up for assessment but also to every other person, including the speaker and listeners. In this way, Hare believes, calling an action wrong commits the speaker to judging wrong any relevantly similar action done at any time and any place by any person. With ordinary prescriptions, it isn’t obvious that there is a state of mind that someone must be in if they utter or obey a command and which we ought to characterize as accepting an imperative. Hare, himself at one point argues that there is no substantive way of characterizing the attitude a person must have if she expresses or accepts a prescription or moral judgment (Hare 1952, 9–11). Even so, prescriptivists have some reason for wanting to offer an account of accepting a moral judgment if they want to explain moral practice. Ordinarily we attribute moral judgments to people, even people who are silent. So the prescriptivist will want to say something about our basis for these attributions. An account of the attitude that constitutes accepting a moral judgment will allow them to ground such attributions. One suggestion is that the attitude of accepting a moral judgment involves an intention to do what the judgments recommend. Sincerely accepting a command directed at oneself involves doing it if one is in circumstances where it applies and one is able and otherwise intending to do it should one find oneself in those circumstances (Hare 1952, 20). Since moral commands are universal according to the theory, they will be directed at everyone. Thus anyone who sincerely accepts a moral judgment will be disposed to do what they believe right in circumstances where they can. Less sincere judgments may lack this connection (Hare 1952, 169). The issue of which attitude, if any, are involved in accepting a prescription is relevant to some of the arguments over internalism that we will consider below. Since non-cognitivism is a species of irrealism about ethics, it should be unsurprising that many of its main motivations overlap with those for other versions of ethical irrealism, especially with those for error theories. Early non-cognitivists seem most concerned to defend metaphysical and epistemic commitments incompatible with a realist interpretation of moral claims. For example, moral judgments seem to be empirically under-determined (Ayer 1952, 106; Mackie 1977, 39). Hence they fail tests for meaningful discourse proposed by logical positivists. If moral language is meaningful, it would be a counter-example to the view. Thus early versions of non-cognitivism were proposed by these theorists, not so much because they were interested in moral philosophy but rather to render innocuous a seeming counter-example to their own theories (Carnap 1937, 24–27; Ayer 1952, 107–109). More contemporary non-cognitivists have also been motivated by similar underlying metaphysical and epistemic commitments. But they have been as concerned with vindicating the legitimacy of moral practice and argument as with anything else. As a result, they have put more time and energy into explaining, and in a certain sense justifying, the realist-seeming features of moral discourse in the absence of a commitment to realism (Hare 1952; Blackburn 1984, 1998; Gibbard 1990). ‘Quasi-Realism’ is Simon Blackburn’s name for this sort of non-cognitivism, and especially his own version of expressivism. Yet other sophisticated non-cognitivists, notably Allan Gibbard, have been happy to work under the quasi-realist banner (Gibbard 2003, 18–19).  What especially distinguishes the quasi-realist project is an emphasis on explaining why we are entitled to act as if moral judgments are genuinely truth-apt even while strictly speaking they are neither true nor false in any robust sense. Thus it is a commitment of a quasi-realist that normative judgments are in an important way different from most (other) paradigm descriptive judgments – enough  so to render problematic their status as either true or  false – and yet that a justification is nonetheless available for our practices of treating them as if they were in fact so. What exactly this comes to is hard to say without discussing some of the special problems for non-cognitivism in general, since it is precisely in offering solutions to those problems that the quasi-realist carries out his program. Thus we will revisit the position later on in the context of these problems. Expressivists of all sorts think that moral sentences are conventional devices for expressing pro and con attitudes towards their objects. In this broad sense emotivists are expressivists; they agree that moral language functions to express non-cognitive attitudes of various sorts.  The claim that moral terms function much like ‘boo’ and ‘hurrah’ qualifies as expressivist in a broad sense.  In recent years, however, the term ‘expressivist’ has come to be used in a narrower way, to refer to views which attempt to construct a systematic semantics for moral sentences by pairing them with the states of mind that the sentences are said to express.  Such expressivists hold that the meanings of all sentences containing moral terms are determined by the mental states that they serve to express. For this to work, the sense in which moral sentences express the attitudes which determine their semantic values must be fairly strict and particular.  For in one sense perfectly ordinary indicative sentences can express non-cognitive attitudes as when, ‘It is ten o’clock already,’ can express impatience.  And, ‘Lying sucks!’ and ‘I disapprove of lying,’ can each express disapproval of lying.  Even so, we should not want to assimilate the semantics of these sentences to one another.  Thus expressivists of the narrower sort must identify a kind of expression which allows them to distinguish the way in which “Lying is wrong,” expresses the attitude that generates its semantic value, from the way in which “I disapprove of lying,” or even “I think that lying is wrong” might express the very same attitude (Schroeder 2008a, 2008c). Those who have taken up this expressivist program have provided a number of candidates for the attitudes expressed by sentences containing normative terminology.  Simon Blackburn, whose quasi-realist project was briefly described above, has contributed various ideas not only for the states expressed by indicative sentences but also for complex embeddings of moral claims.  Hybrid theories that put the expressive function of normative language into the semantics (discussed below) also involve work of this sort. But the proponent who has developed the program in the most systematic way is Allan Gibbard. In two influential books Gibbard has proposed two structurally similar accounts each of which employs a different base noncognitive attitude.  In Gibbard (1990) the attitude was norm-acceptance, whereas in Gibbard (2003) it was a planning attitude akin to intending.  In each case he develops a strategy for combining the relevant noncognitive attitude with belief to generate complex attitudes  that can serve as the semantic values of more complex sentences.  Mark Schroeder’s (2008c) bifurcated attitude semantics is a self-conscious attempt to develop these strategies yet further and to assess prospects for the general strategy. Gibbard’s Wise Choices, Apt Feelings (1990) proposes an analysis of judgments regarding rationality according to which they express a non-cognitive attitude of acceptance towards rules or norms. From there he proceeds to reduce other normative judgments into various more particular kinds of judgments of rationality, so that all moral judgments are covered by the proposed analysis. Gibbard suggests that normative judgments express the acceptance of systems of  norms – rules dividing actions under naturalistic descriptions into those which are forbidden, permitted and required. To call an action rational is, to a first approximation, to express one’s acceptance of a system of norms which allows it. To call an action irrational is to express one’s acceptance of a system of norms which forbids it. And so on (Gibbard 1990, 46). This is only Gibbard’s idea to a first approximation, since a speaker may not have a determinate system of norms in mind when he or she makes such a judgment. So Gibbard suggests we would do better to think of judgments to the effect that an action would be irrational as expressing rejection of any set of norms which does not forbid it. More precisely, a normative judgment predicating a normative term of a particular action rules out combinations of descriptive judgments concerning the action with norms that either permit, forbid, or require (as appropriate) actions falling under those descriptions. More complex judgments are captured using the sets of norm-world pairs which those judgments “rule out” to represent the states of mind inconsistent with the judgments in question. The basic idea can be illustrated with an example. A judgment that action A is permissible is incompatible with a pair the first member of which represents A as a lie, and the second member of which is a norm that rules out lying.  And it is inconsistent with many more such combinations besides.  Given this, we can capture the content of the judgment that action A is permissible by specifying the set of world-norm pairs with which it is incompatible. (A more detailed exposition of Gibbard’s technical apparatus can be found within the discussion of the Embedding Problem below and in the supplementary document   Embedding Problem Response Strategies.) Gibbard develops his analysis to cover moral judgments by analyzing such judgments in terms of judgments of rationality. An action is wrong if and only if it fails to meet standards of action the intentional or negligent violation of which in a normal state of mind would be sufficient for finding the agent prima facie blameworthy. And an action is blameworthy if it would be rational for the agent to feel guilty and for others to resent the agent for doing the action (Gibbard 1990, 45). Since the rationality of guilt or resentment receives a non-cognitive analysis, the approach generates a non-cognitive analysis of moral judgments themselves. Gibbard’s more recent work (Gibbard 2003) retains many of the main features of his norm-expressivist theory but it revises to some extent the account of the non-cognitive attitudes involved in accepting a normative judgment.  On the current view, such judgments express the acceptance of plans, or perhaps better they express a state of mind that we might think of as planning to act in this way or that depending on the naturalistic circumstances one finds oneself in. More complex judgments embedding normative terms express combinations of such attitudes with further attitudes, including ordinary beliefs. Whereas in the earlier work Gibbard used sets of world-norm pairs to formally capture the contents of judgments, in the later work he relies on what he calls “fact-prac worlds”.  Formally they function in much the same way as the world-norm pairs did in the earlier theory.  But with the fact-prac worlds apparatus contingency plans take the place of norms as members of the pairs. Once again, judgements will rule out other judgements represented by a set of pairs.  The judgment that action A is permissible will be inconsistent with various combinations of factual beliefs with plans. Each of these combinations can be captured by a world representing a way the world might be together with a second component consisting of a plan, representing a commitment to act that the thinker might have. For example the judgment that action A is permissible will be incompatible with any pair the fact-representing member of which represents action A as a lie, paired with a plan that rules out lying.  And just as a similar idea allowed Gibbard to use sets of norm-world pairs to capture the content of normative judgments, he now can capture the content of a normative judgment by specifying the set of fact-prac worlds with which it is incompatible. When the apparatus is fully developed, the fact representing members of the pairs can once again be thought of as possible worlds insofar as they specify every detail of the world, and the plans are hyper-plans insofar as they have an answer for what to do in every circumstance.  Gibbard often calls these fully determinate fact-prac worlds “fact-plan worlds”, just as you might expect given what they are composed of. The resulting theory might now be called ‘plan-expressivism’ rather than ‘norm-expressivism’ though most of its important structural features are very similar to those of his earlier norm expressivist view. Further developments come in the form of Gibbard’s arguments for the resulting theory: Gibbard suggests that people need to plan and need ways to think about and represent their plans. He argues that they would also need to think about what to do from the perspectives of various other people and to formulate plans for arbitrary situations they might find themselves in. If these claims are right, a language might naturally develop in order to make such thinking easier. A planning language modeled by the sets of world-plan pairs would serve very well.  And in actual use it would operate much as our actual normative language does. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that our actual normative language is of this sort.  Furthermore conceiving of these attitudes as involving contingency plans for descriptively specifiable circumstances would allow us to explain the supervenience of the moral on the descriptive.  The thoughts represented by the fact-prac world apparatus represent such contingency plans. So the supervenience of the normative on the descriptive falls naturally out of the resulting story (Gibbard 2003). Often philosophical positions are introduced in rather pure and stark versions, only to be modified in light of arguments and objections so as to become more like competing theories over time. It should not be too surprising that this is the case in metaethics and that present day non-cognitivist theories are less distinguishable from cognitivist alternatives than earlier versions. It can even be a controversial matter whether theories developed within the non-cognitivist tradition but modified to handle objections still deserve the label. The varieties of emotivism which postulate both descriptive meaning and emotive meaning have sometimes aroused such suspicions and the more developed hybrids discussed at the end of this section are in that tradition. Furthermore, while paradigm non-cognitivists accept each of the two negative theses outlined above, there are views which accept only one of the two without the other. These positions constitute two metaethical theories which we might think of as borderline cases lying just outside the non-cognitivist region of logical space. Hermeneutic moral fictionalists are not semantic non-factualists. Moral sentences are regarded as genuinely truth-apt. Such sentences do have truth conditions and an assertive sentence using a moral predicate does predicate a property. Yet, in normal use these sentences are not strictly speaking true. Thus far the hermeneutic fictionalist agrees with error theorists. But while error theorists think that the falsity of moral sentences implies that ordinary moral talk is massively in error, fictionalists disagree. According to the hermeneutic fictionalist a speaker uttering a false moral sentence is typically not expressing a belief in the content expressed by the sentence. Rather such speakers are using it fictively, and this use involves no error. Thus, fictionalists are psychological non-cognitivists. Use of a moral sentence does not communicate that the speaker believes the proposition expressed by that sentence.  Rather speakers use such sentences to express other, non-cognitive states of mind. Just as with standard versions of non-cognitivism, fictionalists will generally offer a story about the nature of the non-cognitive attitude expressed. For example, they may suggest that the state of mind is an intention to act as if the moral judgment expressing the intention is true (Kalderon 2005b). At the same time, because they are not pursuing the expressivist semantic program the expression relation need not be exactly what ordinary expressivists take it to be.  Since they need not require a one–to–one mapping of moral sentences onto states of mind that express them to support their semantic theory, fictionalists can allow for more variation in the states of mind such sentences (loosely) express. Hermeneutic fictionalism is often contrasted with revolutionary fictionalism. Revolutionary moral fictionalists think we should reform our current cognitively committed use of normative language to work roughly as the hermeneutic fictionalist thinks we already do (Joyce 2001, 2005). They are thus not committed to non-cognitivism about actual current use of moral terms in the way that hermeneutic fictionalists seem to be. Revolutionary fictionalists could be read as proposing that we convert to using moral language to express something other than belief with our indicative moral sentences, but revolutionary fictionalists have not usually presented their reforms in that way. That should not be too surprising. Fictionalist rejection of semantic nonfactualism leads most taxonomists to omit fictionalism from the non-cognitivist genus. Still at least one prominent hermeneutic fictionalist has presented his view as a version of non-cognitivism (Kalderon 2005b) drawing on some comments in MacIntyre (1981, 15–18). For more detail on fictionalism see the entry on  fictionalism. In contrast, Terry Horgan and Mark Timmons have propounded a view which they call Nondescriptivist Cognitivism. As the label suggests, they do not regard their view as a species of non-cognitivism, but like fictionalism the view does accept one of non-cognitivism’s two constitutive negative theses while rejecting the other. However, with respect to each thesis Horgan and Timmons’s choices contrast with those made by fictionalism. Nondescriptivist cognitivism spurns psychological non-cognitivism, but embraces semantic nonfactualism, at least insofar as it rejects the claim that moral sentences describe the world or predicate genuine properties (Horgan & Timmons 2000; Timmons 1999). The precise content of the view can be difficult to pin down.  Horgan and Timmons challenge a standard Humean division of the mind into a domain of cognitive states which represent the world as being some way and a separate domain of noncognitive states that do not represent the world.  Rather they think there is an important division within the cognitive domain between beliefs that represent the world and beliefs that do not do this but which have non-descriptive but cognitive content. Nondescriptive Cognitivism then holds that moral judgments express such nondescriptive but cognitive states. Indicative sentences apt for expressing these mental states (in one sense of ‘express’) also semantically express the contents of these nondescriptive states just as on a more standard picture indicative sentences semantically express the propositions that are the contents of sentences that (in a different sense of ‘express’) express beliefs. Whether this is in fact a distinctive cognitivist position will depend on the best way of dividing up different sorts of mental states.  Some will think that Horgan and Timmons have stipulated a new use for old terms, but they respond by defending phenomenological criteria for dividing cognitive from non-cognitive mental states that justify counting nonrepresentational states among the cognitive. However that debate comes out, it is nevertheless worth noting the view as one which makes trouble for the standard division between cognitivist and non-cognitivist views.  Together with fictionalism it illustrates a position which accepts only one of the two negative theses constitutive of standard non-cognitivism. If such views are coherent this would suggest the two negative theses are logically independent. Hybrid-expressivist theories can be thought of as another sort of borderline case but for a different reason. These theorists combine the positive claims of expressivism – that moral sentences are conventional devices for the expression of pro-attitudes and that moral attitudes are (partly) non-cognitive with features of cognitivism – that moral sentences predicate properties and that moral attitudes are (partly) cognitive.  There are a variety of ways of combining these ideas and various extant theories adopt many of the options. We’ve already noted a tendency for emotivists and prescriptivists to allow a kind of secondary descriptive meaning for moral terms over and above their expressive meaning in order to capture the way that moral statements can be used to convey descriptive information.  If I know that you are a utilitarian you might convey the information that an action maximizes utility by telling me that it is right. In such cases, what the speaker successfully conveys depends on the audience’s knowledge of the speaker’s moral views. One sort of hybrid theorist incorporates this idea into the semantics of moral expressions. Such theorists suggest that moral utterances as a matter of their semantics predicate a property, one which is determined by the speaker’s moral attitudes, while at the same time expressing a non-cognitive attitude towards that property. Proponents hope that the view will have advantage in explaining the communication of factual information with moral terms and with handling the embedding problem (explained below), while also explaining the motivational efficacy of moral judgements. One implementation of this view equates the main semantic content of a moral predicate with the property it picks out (via a function from the speaker’s attitudes to the relevant properties), while use of the predicate conventionally implicates the presence of a pro or con attitude (Barker 2000). A different implementation of the strategy incorporates both components into the semantic values of moral terms, even while the descriptive content is a function of the non-cognitive attitude expressed.  More specifically on this way of developing the idea, moral sentences to the effect that something is right semantically both express a proposition – that the action has a particular property – and a particular positive attitude toward that particular property. The particular property picked out itself depends on the non-cognitive attitudes of the speaker, insofar as the property predicated is the most general property towards which the speaker holds the non-cognitive attitudes expressed by the very same judgement(Ridge, 2006a, 2006b, 2014).  One upshot is that the descriptive content of a speaker’s judgements can vary over time as the object of her attitudes change. John Eriksson(2009) suggests that R. M. Hare was an early adopter of this kind of hybrid theory. A contrasting sort of hybrid theory holds the descriptive content of moral predicates constant.  Such views are often modeled on slurs or epithets, as explicated in a certain way. It is plausible and perhaps even standard to think of slurs as semantically expressing a certain descriptive property (being a member of such and such a group, say) while also conventionally expressing a negative attitude towards those with the property. Copp (2001, 2009) and Boisvert (2008) suggest that moral terms could function in the same way.  Here again there are various ways to work out the details.  Advocates of the approach can note that it has advantages over the previous kind of hybrid theory in explaining communication insofar as the descriptive content remains fixed from speaker to speaker (Schroeder 2009). And they claim that the view does so without undermining the standard hybrid explanation of the motivational efficacy of moral judgements. Other theorists suggest that pejoratives like ‘idiot’ present a better model than slurs (Hay forthcoming). As the literature develops hybrid views get more complicated and subtle. Close relatives of these theories claim to elude objections directed at each of the above variants and yet the resulting theories are probably best understood as developments of these simpler variants (Schroeder 2013;Toppinen 2013). Perhaps hardest to characterize as a species of non-cognitivism are the claims of several recent theorists who suggest that non-cognitivism is best understood as a metasemantic theory. The claim seems to be that non-cognitivism is a theory not about the meaning of moral sentences or about the contents of moral thoughts, but rather a story at a different level about how sentences and thoughts come to have these meanings or contents (Charlow 2015; Chrisman 2012; Pérez Carballo 2014; Ridge 2014; Silk 2015). One motivation for the view seems to be that it allows noncognitivists to take advantage of ordinary semantic theories and hence avoid the embedding problem. There isn’t yet a lot of literature disputing the idea, but Alwood (2016) expresses some skepticism about the advantages of the approach. It is at least worth thinking about which of the standard motivations for non-cognitivism in ethics support the view when it is construed as a metasemantic theory. Chances are the literature will take up such questions in the near future and subsequent versions of this entry will say more about the developments to come.