 One strategy of objection to non-cognitivism is to find fault with the main motivating ideas. We have already surveyed many of these in the course of discussing the arguments for non-cognitivism. We now turn to objections resting on the content of the theory rather than its motivations. Non-cognitivism as it is often presented is incomplete. It gives us an account of the meanings of moral expressions in free standing predicative uses, and of the states of mind expressed when they are so used. But the identical expressions can be used in more complex sentences, sentences which embed such predications. Thus far we have not considered what the expressions might mean when so used. We say things such as the following: It is true that lying is wrong.   Lying is not wrong.   I wonder whether lying is wrong.   I believe that lying is wrong.   Fred believes that lying is wrong.   Is lying wrong?   If lying is wrong he will be sure to do it.   If lying is wrong then so is misleading truth-telling. So, in addition to their analyses of unembedded predication, non-cognitivists owe us an account of the meanings of more complex sentences or judgments such as these. Of course there are some desiderata we would like an adequate account to fulfill.  (1) One is compositionality; the meaning of a complex sentence embedding a moral claim should be a function of the meaning of its parts so as to explain the ease with which speakers can understand novel normative sentences. (2) Another is that it should preserve and explain the logical relations between moral judgements and other judgements which embed them, at least for central cases. And (3), we want the account not to require implausible verdicts in attributing attitudes to people who use the sentences. For example, if a non-cognitivist says the meaning of ‘Lying is wrong’ is to express disfavor towards lying, that does not yet provide a good explanation of the attitude expressed by the very same words used in many embedded contexts. When those words occur in the antecedent of a conditional, or when a person says, ‘I wonder if lying is wrong’ they they are typically not being used to express such disapproval. The point here is not that these desiderata cannot be satisfied. Leading contemporary non-cognitivists have all tried to provide accounts. As it turns out, the task is difficult and generates much controversy. Geach thought that the second and third desiderata would be especially hard to accomplish simultaneously. Normally we believe that the status of an argument as valid depends, at least in part, on the words not shifting in meaning as we move from premise to premise. But the simplest story of the meaning of moral terms, that they are devices for expressing pro and con attitudes, seems then to require that they mean something else when embedded in the antecedents of conditionals. Consider the following example from Geach (1965, 463): (P1) If tormenting the cat is bad, getting your little brother to do it is bad   (P2) Tormenting the cat is bad.  Ergo, getting your little brother to torment the cat is bad. The argument is valid. But if the entire meaning of ‘tormenting the cat is bad’ in the second premise is well explained by saying that it is suited for use in expressing disapproval of tormenting the cat, then that meaning cannot be the same as the meaning it has in the first premise (which one might accept even if one approves of tormenting cats). This doesn’t show that the expression is not being used emotively in the second premise; a descriptivist can agree to that. But it does indicate that more will need to be said to explain what is going on. For straightforwardly descriptive arguments of the same form, the explanation of why the argument is valid relies on the idea that the phrase in the antecedent has a constant meaning that it represents both unembedded and embedded. This is what Geach has called The Frege Point: “A thought may have just the same content whether you assent to its truth or not; a proposition may occur in discourse now asserted, now unasserted, and yet be recognizably the same proposition” (Geach 1965, 449). As Geach saw it, we need to think of predication as constant across embedded and unembedded occurrences of predicative moral sentences so as not to commit a fallacy of equivocation in making arguments. (It is due to Geach’s invocation of Frege in this context that the embedding problem is often called the Frege-Geach problem.  Searle 1962 independently raises a version of the same objection and some credit W. D. Ross (1939, 34–38) with an earlier yet statement of the objection.) Semantic nonfactualism, the non-cognitivist commitment to the view that moral judgments do not express propositions or predicate properties, rules out one simple way of explaining matters. (But see the discussion of hybrid theories below and in the supplementary document   Embedding Problem Response Strategies.) If there is no proposition expressed in normal predicative uses of moral expressions we eliminate one candidate for a constant element that generates relations of implication with other expressions embedding the same form of words. Arguably we need some other candidate to provide the commonality. As Geach noted, it isn’t plausibly the attitude expressed by the a free-standing sentence since this feature doesn’t always survive embedding as we saw. Perhaps it might be some predictable function of this attitude. That would serve the goal of providing a compositional semantics for the terms in question. It isn’t just that semantic nonfactualism eliminates a candidate for the constant element uniting embedded and unembedded uses of the same normative expression. Such nonfactualism also serves to complicate the semantics, because it eliminates a straightforward and easy way of explaining how different beliefs can be inconsistent and how one belief can commit one to another.  On a standard model for belief in general, belief content is propositional and two beliefs are inconsistent when their contents – the propositions they are directed at – are inconsistent. And one belief logically commits one to another when the content of the first entails the second. Those two ideas, plus an account of what it is for contents – that is propositions – to be inconsistent is all you need to explain the logical relations among beliefs. It isn’t even really important to this general point that the contents be propositions.  The point is that if you treat all beliefs as inheriting their logical properties from the logical properties of their contents in this way, you get a relatively simple story about attitudinal inconsistency and commitment. Once you say that ordinary beliefs and moral beliefs represent different types of attitude towards their contents (if they have contents at all) you can’t any longer tell the simple story.  This remains so even if the theory can allow moral attitudes to have contents in some sense and even if these contents are the same kind of thing as the contents of ordinary beliefs. That’s because the different relations to those contents (taking different attitudes towards them) will need to be taken into account. The resulting theory will need more complicated inconsistency and inference-licensing rules.  I’ll use R. M. Hare’s (1952) logic of phrastics and neustics to illustrate. Because it furthers my purpose in providing this example I’m going to assume that sincere speech acts using moral terms express attitudes and that these attitudes are what we attribute when say they believe something about morality.  This may be more than Hare was committed to himself. Hare thought we could model the logic of speech acts by employing one element that represented a possible way things might be (the phrastic) and a second element that in effect gave instruction for how to interpret the point of the representation (the neustic). For our purposes here we can think of the first element as the contents of the attitude expressed by the speech act and it would not distort the theory too much to say they are propositions. On this way of presenting things, several different speech acts expressing a number of different attitudes will all involve the same phrastic.  The differences between them will be represented by differences in the neustic. The belief that P will be expressed by a speech act which is represented by a neustic that reflects the status of assertion and a phrastic that represents P. A question about whether P is the case will be represented by the same phrastic, but a different neustic – the one that represents the speech act as a question rather than an assertion. The sentence which expresses the thought that P is good (say) will also employ this same phrastic. What distinguishes it from the first two is once again the neustic which will reflect that this judgement is a universal prescription to bring about P.  This means that we cannot compute the logical compatibility or incompatibility of two judgements by noting the compatibility or incompatibility of their phrastics which we are treating as their contents. The assertion of P and the attitude it expresses is different from the assertion that P is good and the attitude it expresses.  Standard semantic theory captures this by assigning these judgements different contents.  Within the theory which treats the phrastic as the content, the difference must be captured by assigning them different neustics as a reflection that they’re supposed to be different kinds of speech acts and to express different kinds of attitudes.  There isn’t yet a problem with that.  But insofar as the judgements clearly have different consistency conditions and involve different logical commitments the resulting logic must now include principles that allow differences in attitude type to matter to consistency and inconsistency. Hare was aware of the point. And if we were dealing with only a few different types of attitude and corresponding expressive speech act it should be no difficulty at all.  But once we introduce new sentences joining the terms we have so far with logical connectives we are likely to need to postulate yet further attitude types and to need further principles to capture their logical properties. Such complex sentences express attitudes that don’t reduce to the attitudes which would be expressed by either conjunct (Schroeder 2008c, 49).  It would thus be wrong to equate the attitude expressed with either accepting the one attitude or accepting the other.  Relatedly, a speech act “asserting” a disjunction with one normative disjunct and one non-normative disjunct should be a new kind of speech act.  It doesn’t universally prescribe anything, nor (on the theory we’re working with) does it assert anything. And similarly for the attitude expressed by that speech act. It will be a new type of state of mind. So we’ll need a new sort of neustic to capture the kind of speech act this is. And we’ll need additional rules to tell us about the logic of speech act types represented by those neustics. Schroeder (2008b, 2008c) dubs the distinction between inconsistencies that involve one attitude-type directed towards inconsistent contents, A-type inconsistencies and contrasts them with B-type inconsistencies which postulate inconsistencies that stem from incoherences between the attitude types in conjuction with their contents. For example approving of a proposition and disapproving of the same proposition is inconsistent (if it is) not in virtue of directing one and the same attitude at inconsistent propositions, but rather because two allegedly incompatible attitude-types are directed at the same proposition.  And he notes that the clearest examples of genuine inconsistency – beliefs in contradictories and intentions to pursue inconsistent courses of action – seem to be A-type. He further suggests that this would be a reason to prefer an A-type model if non-cognitivists could construct one. Non-cognitivists have developed various ingenious strategies for constructing a theory that preserves the intuitive logical relations between normative attitudes, non-normative attitudes and various mixed attitudes, along with the sentences that express them. We will briefly survey some main variants below.  For a more thorough survey see the supplementary document  Embedding Problem Response Strategies, which can be read in place of the remainder of section 4.1. Much of the recent innovation in developing non-cognitivist theories is motivated by a desire to address the embedding problem.  In what remains of this section we will briefly survey three differing approaches to the task, which may also be combined. These are (1) developing a logic of the sentences by explaining how that logic falls out of logical relations among the attitudes they express, (2) exploiting minimalism with regard to truth and related notions to provide an account of certain locutions, and (3) allowing the descriptive semantic component postulated by hybrid expressivist theories to explain the logical relations among normative sentences and attitudes. The idea behind a logic of attitudes is to change the normal order of explanation to explain why normative sentences and attitudes bear the logical relations that they do to other sentences and attitudes.  As noted above, standard cognitivist accounts of a domain of discourse will explain the consistency or inconsistency of states of mind by citing the consistency or inconsistency of that state’s content, that is what it represents. The belief that dogs howl is inconsistent with the belief that dogs don’t howl because their contents (that dogs do or don’t howl) are inconsistent with one another.  And similarly for the sentences expressing those beliefs. Since noncognitivists don’t postulate such representational contents they can’t deploy that explanation.  But they might still be able to do justice to the fact that normative judgments and sentences stand in logical relations to one another if they can explain how the judgments themselves stand in certain logical relations to to one another and then go on to explain that the sentences are inconsistent just because they express judgments that are inconsistent. One such approach has been to suggest that the complex moral or normative judgments are higher order attitudes aimed at the judgements that would be expressed by the sentences which they embed. These higher order attitudes might either be complex beliefs (Blackburn 1971) or further non-cognitive judgments (Blackburn 1984) expressed by the corresponding complex sentences. The hope is that these judgments will have rational connections to the other judgments that are likely to play a role in valid arguments. If all goes well, a kind of pragmatic incoherence or irrationality will be involved when someone accepts the judgments of a valid argument so analyzed while at the same time rejecting the conclusion. Such a speaker would be in a state similar to those uttering sentences of the sort that feature in Moore’s paradox, such as ‘It is raining but I don’t believe that it is.’ A simple example of this sort of approach comes from Blackburn. Conditionals express higher order attitudes towards accepting certain conjunctions of attitudes. “If lying is wrong, telling your little brother to lie is wrong,” (when sincerely uttered) expresses approval of making disapproval of getting one’s brother to lie “follow upon” disapproval of lying. Logical entailments involving moral judgments are explained as follows: A constellation of attitudes which includes the attitudes expressed by the conditional and by the seemingly assertive premises but not those expressed by the conclusion is irrational, because it goes against the purposes of moral discourse. Somewhat more sophisticated ways of developing this strategy can be worked out but the basic idea is well exemplified in this proposal. The logic of attitudes strategy has met with much resistance on the part of cognitivists. One line of thought is that these proposals conflate genuine inconsistency with mere pragmatic incoherence (Hale 1986; Schueler 1988; Brighouse 1990; Zangwill 1992; van Roojen 1996). And non-cognitivists have responded with increasingly more sophisticated proposals about the logic of attitudes, including several proposals that do not employ higher order attitudes (Baker & Woods 2015; Blackburn 1988b; Gibbard 1990, 2003; Horgan and Timmons 2006b; Schroeder 2008a, 2008b, 2008c). These are discussed in more detail in the supplementary document Embedding Problem Response Strategies. Some have suggested that minimalism or deflationism about truth or truth aptness can allow non-cognitivists to bypass some of the above debates. A very rough characterization of minimalism about truth will hopefully suffice to explain. Minimalist theories are often presented by contrast with theories of truth according to which truth is some sort of “substantial” relation or property. For example correspondence theories which claim that truth involves a real relation between truth-bearers and reality are often cited as paradigm cases of a substantial theory of truth. Most minimalists about truth suggest that truth is not such a substantial property. Different minimalists formulate their positive claims in somewhat different ways. One version suggests that all you need to know to understand the ‘is true’ locution is that it is appropriate to use it in conjunction with any indicative sentence which is itself appropriate in the context of use. To call a sentence true is just to assert or affirm the sentence (Ramsey 1927). There are other variants besides this one. What we need to note is just that the suggestion helps explain the meaning of normative sentences in one embedded context, namely the one in which it is embedded along in an ‘is true’ construction.  Extensions of this minimalist strategy have attempted to deploy minimal conceptions of other notions such as truth-aptness, proposition (Horwich 1990, 18–22) and more besides to extend the account to normative sentences seeming to employ these notions. Some minimalists have even claimed that these ideas will help with constructions that don’t obviously involve terms that get minimal treatments. Discussion of those proposals is found in the supplementary document  Embedding Problem Response Strategies. We noted earlier that non-cognitivists have long granted to evaluative utterances and thoughts some secondary “descriptive meaning” and that hybrid theorists have gone on to give that descriptive content nearly co-equal status. One motivation for such views is rooted in a strategy for solving the embedding problem: Hybrid theorists hope to explain logical relations among moral judgements by using the descriptive component of meaning to do much of the work. Hybrid theorists have differed over whether the non-cognitive component is expressed semantically by some component of the sentence or pragmatically. Still hybrid theorists tend to agree that the belief contents are part of the semantic values of the sentences that express them (Jackson 1999, Barker 2000; Copp 2001; Ridge 2006a, 2006b, 2014; Boisvert 2008; Copp 2009).  This would seem to entail that these sentences are inconsistent with any judgement that a sentence expressing only the belief component would be inconsistent with. Hybrid theorists can thus use the alleged descriptive component of the meanings of moral judgments to generate most of the required logical relations that moral judgements bear to other judgements, supplementing the basic account just enough to account for complications introduced by the non-cognitive component of relevant judgements. Cognitivists have raised doubts about the adequacy of several of these proposals due to the manner in which the descriptive meaning is determined by many of these theories(van Roojen 2005; Schroeder 2009) and how they can be used to communicate the content they allegedly have (Schroeder 2009). Hybrid theorists have, of course, resisted these complaints (Alm 2007, Ridge 2007; Eriksson 2010). and hybrid theories that take epithets and slurs as their model aren’t subject to the same objections (Copp 2001, 2009; Boisvert 2008). A more thorough discussion of these issues can be found in the supplementary document  Embedding Problem Response Strategies. A well-known objection to non-cognitivism pays close attention to the distinction between explaining logical relations on the one hand, and explaining the use of moral judgments in reasoning on the other. Even if the embedding problem is solved, so that we know what moral utterances mean and what complex sentences embedding them also mean, we might still think it irrational to reason in accordance with ordinary logical principles applied to such judgments. The basic idea here is that conditionals with moral antecedents and nonmoral consequents should, together with the moral judgment in the antecedent, license acceptance of the consequent. Thus someone who accepts such conditionals would be rational to infer the consequent upon coming to accept the antecedent. But if expressivism is correct, accepting the antecedent just is holding a non-cognitive attitude. Thus the licensed inference is really a form of wishful thinking, for a non-cognitive change of attitude has licensed a change of belief. For example, suppose someone accepts a judgment expressible by saying, “If doing an action is wrong, George will do it.” Normally we think that it would be rational for that person to infer the belief that George will hit Sam upon coming to accept that hitting Sam is wrong. But according to non-cognitivism, coming to accept that hitting Sam is wrong is just a change of non-cognitive attitude, and it can seem wrong to think that a change in such attitudes can rationalize a change in belief. It looks like the non-cognitivist is committed to approving of something analogous to wishful thinking. That is they believe something, not because of a change in their evidence but because of a change in attitude alone (Dorr 2002). Some non-cognitivists will resist by suggesting that the conditionals themselves are only rational to accept when one thinks that changes of mind about the antecedent will depend on beliefs about facts that are evidentially relevant to the conclusion (Budolfson 2011; Lenman 2003; Mabrito 2013;). Enoch (2003) presents an alternative response which is criticized in (Schroeder 2011, chapter 9). Another issue to do with moral reasoning has to do with uncertainty, insofar as we can be uncertain of our moral judgements and this will affect how we reason with them. Michael Smith (2002) argues that non-cognitivists have insufficient resources to distinguish variations in moral certainty from differences in both the perceived importance of what is being judged right or wrong and in the stability of such judgements under the influence of new information. The gradable dimensions of desire seem to be strength and stability. If strength is used to represent importance and stability to capture stability of judgements in the face of new information desires will lack a dimension to represent the certainty with which the moral judgement is held. Cognitivists, by contrast, can allow perceived importance to be captured by a further belief – the belief that the matter is of a certain importance. So they can let certainty just be a matter of credence and robustness in the face of new evidence be just what it seems. Non-cognitivists, as usual, won’t just concede the point.  Rather they will explain how their theories have the resources to make the needed distinctions. Lenman (2003c) is an early response in this vein. And Sepielli (2012) argues that any view with enough structure to solve Frege-Geach can also make the relevant distinctions. Still, there has not yet been a lot of work by non-cognitivists on credence as applied to moral judgements. Staffel (forthcoming) is thus an important development, offering an account of credence for non-cognitivists and responding to Smith’s argument along the way. It has seemed obvious to many that non-cognitivism has much in common with various relativist metaethical views. Though non-cognitivists may deny that the truth values of moral judgments are relative to speakers or agents because such judgments have no truth values, non-cognitivists have often accepted something similar to relativism. For non-cognitivists hold that it is semantically appropriate for a person to utter a moral judgment whenever she wishes to express the relevant non-cognitive attitude. And many noncognitivists also believe that there are few rational constraints on holding the relevant attitudes.  But then it is hard to see how consistent moral judgments can be mistaken (Carnap 1937, 30; Hare 1963, 110). If relativism is problematic, it isn’t obvious that non-cognitivism avoids the problems. Still many non-cognitivists have argued that the view does not entail or justify relativism. They claim that whether or not a moral judgment is mistaken is itself a matter for moral theorizing. A speaker should only call a moral judgment true if he or she accepts that judgment. A speaker who expresses his or her acceptance of relativism in the normal way might say something such as “They’re both saying something true”. This might seem to be expressing commitment to a very deferential moral theory – one according to which each agent should just do what she believes is right. The non-cognitivists who adopt this response argue that this natural interpretation of such claims is correct.  What may seem to be a higher level metaethical claim – that no consistent set of moral judgments is mistaken – , is really just another moral judgment and hence one which would be rejected by any moral judge with substantive moral commitments (Blackburn 1998, 296 & 304; Timmons 1999; Horgan and Timmons 2006c).  If this line of argument works it will allow non-cognitivism to gain the allegiance of those who wish to deny relativism while giving the motivations that lead to both it and non-cognitivism their due. Many think it a desideratum in metaethical theorizing that a candidate theory be consistent with all or most normative theories actually defended by serious normative ethical proponents. This idea has played some role in the debate over the embedding problem insofar as some of the proposals have been inconsistent with substantive positions taken in the debate about the possibility of moral dilemmas (Gibbard 1990, 88; van Roojen 1996, 324). But even aside from that particular issue, the desideratum can make a good deal of work for the non-cognitivist because of the variety of kinds of moral theory and the variety of differing but allegedly consistent judgments proposed by theorists. A simple example non-cognitivists need to be able to distinguish is that judgements of rightness from judgements of goodness. According to standard non-consequentialist theories, rightness and goodness can come apart. In other words, a right action can be such as not to produce the most goodness. Of course consequentialists deny this, and non-consequentialists who use agent-relative values to specify the rightness of actions can also deny that rightness and goodness come apart in this way (Broome 1991, chapter 1). But even if they are incorrect as a matter of substantive moral philosophy, it would seem that competent moral judges can hold views of the sort described without contradiction. Non-cognitivists would like to be able to give an explanation of this consistent with their analyses.  Hence they need a way of distinguishing the psychological states involved in making the two sorts of judgement. A salient strategy might be to claim that they attach to different things – rightness to actions and goodness to states of affairs. Still it seems that competent speakers can and do consistently judge certain actions right but not good. A different strategy would be to distinguish varieties of positive attitudes such that one sort involves a kind of approval distinctive of rightness, whereas another involves a kind distinctive of goodness. Yet another method would be to use something like the two step approach Gibbard uses when he analyzes judgments of rightness in terms of judging it rationally appropriate to feel guilt and anger at certain actions. The approval could be all of the same sort, but the objects of approval might be feelings of guilt in one case and feelings of sorrow in the other, even when these feelings are directed at one and the same object such as an action. No doubt there are other available strategies so the problem does not by itself constitute an objection. It can however complicate the task of constructing an adequate non-cognitivist theory, especially since it can impact the force of other objections as with the embedding problem and moral dilemmas noted above. A discussion of an additional issue raised in trying to account for the variety of moral judgments with in a non-cognitivist framework is found in the following supplementary document. Supplement on  Agent-Centered Teleology