 There is a broad sense of “moral naturalism” whereby a moral naturalist is someone who believes an adequate philosophical account of morality can be given in terms entirely consistent with a naturalistic position in philosophical inquiry more generally. As science has developed over the last several centuries, it has seemed to many that the kinds of facts that scientists investigate through empirical methods are the only kinds of facts that there are. Religion and superstition have fallen by the wayside; the only things that we ought to believe in are the kinds of things that science can tell us about. This increasingly common attitude combines a metaphysical doctrine—that the only things that exist are natural things—with an epistemological doctrine—that we know about the world strictly by the use of experimentation and other empirical methods. Moral naturalism refers to any version of moral realism that is consistent with this general philosophical naturalism. Moral realism is the view that there are objective, mind-independent moral facts. For the moral naturalist, then, there are objective moral facts, these facts are facts concerning natural things, and we know about them using empirical methods. Naturalism in this sense is opposed by those who reject a parsimonious naturalistic metaphysics and stand willing to allow a domain of nonnatural or supernatural facts to play an essential role in our understanding of morality. Naturalism is also opposed by “anti-realists”, including error theorists, constructivists, relativists, and expressivists. According to error theorists, there are no moral facts of any kind. And according to constructivists, relativists, and expressivists, there are moral facts, but these facts are subjective, rather than objective. Anti-realists hold that, if there are any moral facts, these facts are merely products of our contingent attitudes. Anti-realists are typically moral naturalists according to the more general definition of ‘moral naturalism’, as anti-realists typically attempt to understand morality in terms that are consistent with general philosophical naturalism. But for the purposes of this entry, anti-realism should be understood as opposed to moral naturalism. We have said that moral naturalism is a conjunction of three claims: Moral Realism: There are objective, mind-independent moral facts. Metaphysical Naturalism: Moral facts are natural facts. Epistemic Naturalism: We know moral claims are true in the same way that we know about claims in the natural sciences. But moral naturalism is sometimes associated with a fourth, linguistic claim, about the nature of moral language. That claim is: Analytic Naturalism: Our moral claims are synonymous with certain (highly complex) claims in the natural sciences. Of these four claims, Metaphysical Naturalism is often taken to be the claim that is most central to the doctrine of moral naturalism. The debate between naturalists and non-naturalists is typically taken to be a debate about the nature of moral properties. Are those properties natural or non-natural?—this seems to be a straightforward metaphysical question. But Metaphysical Naturalism is not an unproblematic thesis. What does the naturalness of a fact or property consist in, exactly? That’s a pretty basic question, but philosophers are often left embarrassingly tongue-tied when called on to answer it. Some claim (e.g., Bedke 2009, Enoch 2010, Lutz forthcoming) that natural properties or facts are those that have causal or explanatory power, while others have attempted to distinguish natural properties from non-natural properties in other metaphysical terms (see McPherson 2015). But the difficulty of defining a “natural” property, often combined with a general Humean or Kantian skepticism about philosophers’ ability to meaningfully investigate any metaphysical questions, has made many philosophers wary of discussing Metaphysical Naturalism directly. Accordingly, many define moral naturalism through the lens of Analytic Naturalism or Epistemic Naturalism. We might define a “natural fact” not in metaphysical terms, but rather in linguistic terms: as the kind of fact about which we make certain kinds of claims—natural or descriptive claims. Claims are or are not “natural” depending on what kind of terminology they use. Claims that use normative terminology like ‘good’, ‘bad’, ‘right’, ‘wrong’, etc. are normative claims. Claims that avoid this use of evaluative terminology, and instead use terminology common to the natural sciences, are natural claims. If moral claims and natural claims are synonymous, as the Analytic Naturalist holds, then moral and natural claims must refer to the same facts. If the moral claims refer to the same facts that natural claims refer to, it follows that moral claims refer to natural facts. Thus, Analytic Naturalism can provide us with a sensible and tractable explanation of how moral facts could be “natural” facts (Parfit 2011, chapters 24–25). Alternatively, we might define ‘natural facts’ in epistemic terms: as those facts that can only be investigated through empirical methods. Thus, if we accept Metaphysical Naturalism and hold that moral facts are “natural”, this entails Epistemic Naturalism—that moral facts are the kinds of facts that we investigate using empirical methods. Shafer-Landau (2003) defines a ‘natural’ fact in these epistemic terms, and so, because he believes that we can know moral facts by using intuition (which is not an empirical method), he rejects moral naturalism. It might be tempting to say that moral naturalism should, properly understood, consist in the conjunction of Epistemic, Metaphysical, and Analytic Naturalism. But that suggestion would be unacceptable, as there is a strong tension between Epistemic Naturalism and Analytic Naturalism. If Analytic Naturalism is true, then it should be possible (at least in principle) to go through a process of conceptual analysis that would reveal the synonymy between moral claims and claims in the natural sciences. But if this is possible, then substantive moral principles are knowable a priori—which, in turn, entails that substantive moral principles are not known in the same way as scientific principles. Analytic Naturalism therefore seems to entail that Epistemic Naturalism is false, and vice versa. Naturalists who accept Analytic Naturalism are called, appropriately enough, analytic naturalists. Naturalists who reject Analytic Naturalism are synthetic naturalists, since they hold that claims regarding relations between the moral and the natural are synthetic rather than analytic. This is not to say that analytic naturalists allow no room for empirical investigation into morality—far from it. If, for instance, an analytic naturalist were to hold that the term ‘good’ is synonymous with ‘pleasurable’, they would hold that the claim “Pleasure is good” is analytic, and knowable a priori. But the claim “It is good to help others” would be the kind of claim that is amenable to empirical investigation, in virtue of the fact that “It is good to help others” would be synonymous with “It is pleasant to help others”, and whether pleasure results from helping others is the kind of claim that can be empirically investigated. So analytic naturalists should be understood as saying that some moral claims—in particular, moral claims that state general relations between natural properties and moral properties (like “Pleasure is good”)—are knowable a priori. Synthetic naturalists claim that all moral claims are synthetic claims, knowable by empirical methods. In sum, while any moral naturalist will agree with the statement that moral facts are natural facts, different philosophers will mean different things by that statement. Moral naturalism is an attractive view. As a form of realism, it offers to make robust sense of moral objectivity and moral knowledge, allowing for moral utterances to be truth-apt in straightforward ways and for some of them to be true. And as a form of naturalism it is widely seen as preferable to rival forms of moral realism. Moral properties and facts, realistically construed, can often seem unpalatably “queer”, as Mackie famously expressed it (Mackie 1977, chapter 1, section 9): a realist can seem committed to the existence of metaphysically far out entities or properties and embarrassed by the lack of any plausible epistemic story of how we can obtain knowledge of them. The naturalist offers to save realism but eliminate the mystery. Moral realism and general philosophical naturalism are both attractive views in their own right. Moral realism seems necessary to do justice to do our sense of right and wrong being more than a matter of opinion, and philosophical naturalism has proven to be the most successful project, ever, for advancing human knowledge and understanding. And while anti-realists and non-naturalists dispute realism and naturalism, respectively, moral naturalism is a plausible conjunction of two plausible views. In recent years, moral non-naturalism has been the subject of much more discussion than moral naturalism, as moral non-naturalists have discovered new ways of articulating and defending their view. But along with an increase in the popularity of moral non-naturalism, there has been a corresponding increase in the popularity of arguments against non-naturalism. These arguments, indirectly, provide support for moral naturalism. If there are arguments that have force against the moral non-naturalist, but not the naturalist, then these arguments give us reason to be naturalists about morality. While many objections can and have been offered against non-naturalism, we’ll look at the two most prominent here. The first argument against normative non-naturalism concerns normative supervenience. The normative supervenes on the natural; in all metaphysically possible worlds in which the natural facts are the same as they are in the actual world, the moral facts are the same as well. This claim has been called the “least controversial thesis in metaethics” (Rosen forthcoming); it is very widely accepted. But it is also a striking fact that stands in need of some explanation. For naturalists, such an explanation is easy to provide: the moral facts just are natural facts, so when we consider worlds that are naturally the same as the actual world, we will ipso facto be considering worlds that are morally the same as the actual world. But for the non-naturalist, no such explanation seems available. In fact, it seems to be in principle impossible for a non-naturalist to explain how the moral supervenes on the natural. And if the non-naturalist can offer no explanation of this phenomenon that demands explanation, this is a heavy mark against non-naturalism (McPherson 2012). It is highly controversial whether this argument succeeds (for discussion, see McPherson (2012), Enoch (2011, Ch. 6), Wielenberg (2014, Ch. 1), Leary 2017, Väyrynen 2017, Rosen forthcoming,). But if it does succeed, then it provides a good reason to think that moral properties, if they exist, must be natural properties. The second argument against moral non-naturalism concerns moral epistemology. According to evolutionary debunking arguments, our moral beliefs are products of evolution, and this evolutionary etiology of our moral beliefs serves to undermine them. Exactly why evolution debunks our moral beliefs is a matter of substantial controversy, and the debunking argument has been interpreted in a number of different ways (Vavova 2015). Sharon Street, whose statement of the evolutionary debunking argument has been highly influential, holds that debunking arguments make a problem for all versions of moral realism—her paper is entitled “A Darwinian Dilemma for Realist Theories of Value.” But according to another popular line of argument, these debunking arguments are only problems for moral non-naturalism. The fundamental worry is that our moral beliefs are the product of evolutionary facts rather than moral facts. If this is so, this would serve to debunk our moral beliefs, either because it is a necessary condition on justified belief that you take your beliefs to be explained by the facts in question (Joyce 2006, Ch. 6; Bedke 2009; Lutz forthcoming) or else because the non-naturalist is left with no way to explain the reliability of our moral beliefs (Enoch 2009, Schechter 2017). But if moral naturalism is true, the realist needn’t grant the skeptic’s premise that our moral beliefs are the product of evolutionary facts rather than moral facts. If moral facts are natural, then we needn’t see moral facts as being contrary to natural, evolutionary facts. The moral facts might be among these evolutionary facts that explain our moral beliefs. If, for instance, to be good just is to be conducive to social cooperation, then an evolutionary account that says that we judge things to be good only when they are conducive to social cooperation would not debunk any of our beliefs about goodness. This account would, instead, provide a deep vindication of those beliefs (Copp 2008). It is open to naturalists to say that the moral facts are wholly or partly responsible for us having the moral beliefs that we have. This allows them to address any number of different epistemic objections that the moral non-naturalist seems ill-equipped to answer. If these objections do succeed against only the non-naturalist, that’s a good reason to think that moral properties, if they exist, must be natural properties.