 In correspondence with Einstein, Schlick explained that his monograph on Space and Time in Contemporary Physics was “less a representation of the general theory itself than a thorough-going elucidation of the thesis that space and time have now forfeited all objectivity in physics” (Schlick 1917). Of course, Schlick is referring to Einstein’s remark in his 1916 paper on the General Theory, that the admission of arbitrary coordinative transformations “removes the last vestige of physical objectivity from space and time” (Einstein 1916, 117). In his monograph, Schlick first described the differences between the space of the older physics and the space postulated by Einstein. In Newtonian physics (as well as the physics of the Special Theory), all measurement was founded on the notion of a rigid rod and space was still regarded as Euclidean so long as measurements were made within the same coordinate system. Thus, in the older physics, space was conceived as complete with metrical properties, defined by rigid rods which possess the same length in any place at any time. It is particularly to be noted that the metrical properties of space were regarded as independent of the distribution of bodies in space and their gravitational fields. It is precisely these conditions that are changed in General Relativity. Rather, in the General Theory, the principle of general covariance implies that properties cannot be ascribed to space independently of any consideration of the things in it. Einstein showed that non-Euclidean methods of determining measurements must be used in the presence of a gravitational field and this follows from the insight that it is the things in space which give it a particular structure. The result is a complete relativization of space (Schlick 2006a, Sec. VII). In classical mechanics, it was decided by convention (see above) that a rigid rod was the same length throughout space and this convention was modified in Special Relativity. But in General Relativity, the length of a rigid rod may also depend on its place and position in such a way that consistency with Special Relativity is maintained. Thus, to maintain the general postulate of relativity, it is necessary to reduce the objective spatial structure of the earlier physics to a non-intuitive topology. This is a radical departure from the objectivity of the spatial structure of these earlier systems, which was entirely an artifact of their fixed metrical structure. But in Relativity Theory, the resulting conceptual construction admits of distinct metrical structures in different regions depending on the gravitational field in that region. As Schlick reflects in the closing pages of Space and Time …, the very possibility of the objectivity of this conceptual construction depends entirely on the method of point-coincidences. Any features of the world-picture which do not contribute to the systematization of point-coincidences are not physically objective. And all world-pictures which contain laws governing point-coincidences are thoroughly equivalent.  Furthermore, since any functional, single-valued deformation of the world-picture leaves all point-coincidences undisturbed, the equations of physics retain their form under such transformations, implying that they are covariant under all substitutions. These substitutions also leave the form of physical equations unchanged for coordinate-systems in motion, allowing for the relativity of space within such coordinate-systems, thus depriving space and time of the “last vestige of physical objectivity” (Schlick 2006a, Sec. VII). Einstein was so impressed with Schlick’s presentation that, in a letter to Arnold Sommerfeld, Einstein described it as “masterly”, perhaps because Schlick was one of the first commentators to see that space and time have no existence or reality prior to the metric field. Nor was it long before Space and Time … was succeeded by the first edition of Schlick’s General Theory of Knowledge. During the same period, Schlick spent a year engaged in war work at Aldershof airport outside Berlin followed, in 1921, by an appointment at Kiel. Since rumors were already spreading about a possible appointment at Vienna, Schlick’s family stayed in Rostock until 1922, when they moved to Vienna where he assumed the Chair of Naturphilosophie which had previously been occupied by Ernst Mach and Ludwig Boltzmann (v. d. Velde-Schlick 2008; Ferrari 2009). Schlick’s selection for the post was probably initiated by the mathematician Hans Hahn and the physicist Phillip Frank, with a strong recommendation from Einstein. When Schlick arrived in Vienna, he immediately became involved with Hahn and Frank, as well as the economist Otto Neurath, in their Thursday night discussion meetings in the Chemistry Building of the University of Vienna. Schlick was a welcome addition to the group, and together they formed the core of what would later become known as ‘the Vienna Circle’ (Uebel 2003). Philosophy would never be the same. However, before arriving in Vienna, Schlick engaged the neo-Kantians,  Hans Reichenbach and  Ernst Cassirer, who had published their own philosophical understandings of the new physics of Relativity. In his Relativity Theory and Apriori Knowledge of 1920, Reichenbach had argued for a modified conception of Kant’s synthetic apriori, which challenged Schlick’s thought in a decisive way (Reichenbach 1920). At Einstein’s request, Schlick wrote to Reichenbach in the Fall of 1920, hoping to air the differences between them (Schlick 1920; Einstein 1920). In his own essays, Schlick had challenged Kantian apriorism principally by identifying the presuppositions of the new physics as conventions, in Poincaré’s sense. Since the presuppositions of Relativity were alien to classical physics, they were nothing like the self-evident, eternal verities that comprised the Kantian apriori. But while Schlick rejected Kant’s treatment of the apriori altogether, Reichenbach claimed to have preserved its most important element, its constitutive function (Reichenbach 1920, Ch. V; Friedman 1999, 59–70; Oberdan 2009). For Kant had attributed the apriori the far more philosophically significant function of constituting the object of experience or knowledge. Indeed, such principles are the general laws for ordering experience to produce knowledge. Since all empirical knowledge presupposes these ordering principles, they can never conflict with experience and are, in this sense, necessarily true.  (Reichenbach 1920, pp. 55–56) Schlick first wrote Reichenbach in the Fall of 1920, acknowledging that he regarded the assumption of constitutive principles as self-evident; indeed, he feared that the matter was so obvious that he might not have discussed it sufficiently in his General Theory of Knowledge (Schlick 1920a, p. 1; Oberdan 1994, pp. 109–110). Nonetheless, it is precisely the principles which Reichenbach himself had identified as synthetic apriori that constitute an observation or measurement of an experience. Yet, Schlick confessed, he was unable to discover any characteristics of these alleged synthetic apriori principles that genuinely distinguish them from conventions. Of course, it then follows that the precepts Reichenbach called “synthetic apriori” were just what Schlick had identified as “conventions” and the differences between them were, at most, terminological (Schlick 1920b, 2). But this apparently terminological difference, Schlick thought, masked a far deeper difference separating them since, on Reichenbach’s understanding, the apriori constitutes the objects of experience and knowledge whereas, on Schlick’s, conventions only constitute concepts, which may be applied to experiences and objects, but do not constitute them. Thus Schlick insisted on distinguishing his own realist epistemology from Reichenbach’s modified Kantianism, because of the latter’s implicit anti-realism. Schlick also contributed a critical essay on Ernst Cassirer’s 1921 work on Einstein’s Theory of Relativity to the prestigious journal Kant-Studien (Cassirer 1921; Schlick 1979a, 322–334). In “Critical or Empiricist Interpretation of Modern Physics?” of 1921, Schlick explained that Cassirer’s argument rested on a false dichotomy. On the one hand, Cassirer’s own Logical Idealism incorporates principles for the ordering and measuring of sensations to constitute physical objects. On the other hand, the only alternative Cassirer considered is a variety of phenomenalistic empiricism founded on “the sensualistic concept of experience”. In other words, Cassirer’s operative assumption is simply that the only possible philosophical frameworks for understanding contemporary science are a strict empiricism or one incorporating constitutive principles. Of course, Schlick regarded his own philosophical framework as a clear counterexample, since it is an empiricist epistemology distinguished by its inclusion of constitutive principles. Thus, Cassirer committed the same error as Reichenbach by blithely ignoring the possibility of constitutive principles which are not synthetic apriori judgments.  Naturally, a combination of empiricism with constitutive principles would fall somewhere between the strict empiricism Cassirer refutes and the Logical Idealism Cassirer defends. At this point, Schlick first used what would eventually become a familiar complaint against Kant and the neo-Kantians among Logical Positivists, especially their characterization of the constitutive principles as synthetic judgments apriori. As Schlick understood constitutive principles, they are certainly not synthetic apriori principles, for they are conventions, which are neither apriori nor synthetic (Schlick 1979a, 322–334). The result of Schlick’s critique was, in Einstein’s words, “truly inspirational” (Einstein 1921).