 Schlick’s earlier epistemological insights, as well as the conventionalist framework developed in his work on the Special Theory, set the stage for his thought in the two works which distinguish his pre-Positivist era: General Theory of Knowledge (largely composed in 1916, with its first edition appearing in 1918 and the second edition in 1925) and Space and Time in Contemporary Physics. (Engler 2009, 130 fn. 51)  (Space and Time … appeared for the first time in 1917 as an extended essay in the prestigious journal, Die Naturwissenschaften; soon it was re-issued in three more editions and eventually translated into eleven languages). Before explaining how Schlick’s epistemology embraced the new physics, it is necessary, first of all, to consider how he further developed his earlier epistemological insights. General Theory is notable for a key innovation in its treatment of concepts, for they are defined in terms of mathematical equations rather than reducing them to complexes of intuitive images (Schlick 2009, Sec. 5). In order to articulate his ideas about the nature of concepts and how they are formed, Schlick borrowed the idea of definition by axioms from recent work in the foundations of geometry by Moritz Pasch, David Hilbert, and Henri Poincaré. In their work on alternative geometries, these mathematicians came to regard the effects of altering the axioms of geometry as changing the meaning of their constituent terms, thus re-defining the primitive geometric concepts. The idea is ingenious in its simplicity, for it treats the geometric primitives as defined by the relations they bear to one another according to the axioms, so the meanings of the terms ‘point’, ‘lies between’, and ‘lies upon’ are fixed by the geometric axioms. The reason mathematicians adopted this method is to insure the certainty of geometry by insuring that it was invulnerable to the criticism that its primitive elements were defined by intuition. Schlick claimed the method of definition by axioms was implicit because, unlike explicit definition, occurrences of the defined term cannot necessarily be replaced by a combination of the expressions which define it. And he praised the method for its specification of meanings independently of any intuitive content. Implicitly defined terms possess a clarity and precision of scope which cannot be achieved by concepts defined by abstraction from experience. Since, of course, axiomatic definitions stipulate the meanings of all their constituent concepts in terms of the remaining ones, the axioms effectively define concepts by their relations to one another. Thus implicit definitions are structural definitions, and their constituent terms are structurally defined (Schlick 2009, Sec. 7). The concepts thus defined are only related to the other elements of the axiom system and are not related to anything external to the axiom system until the definition is coordinated with extra-linguistic things. In Schlick’s earlier writings, he had stated that concepts themselves are functions which signify or designate the items with which they are coordinated or associated. Accordingly, even implicitly defined concepts must be coordinated with objects, elements of the class of things to which it applies (Schlick 1979a, 130; Schlick 2009, 23; Ryckman 1991, Sec. 3). Of course, these objects, like the concepts which designate them, are distinguished by possession of the properties in terms of which the designating concepts are defined. Such coordinations give empirical content to implicitly defined concepts, transforming them into full-blooded concepts rather than empty place-holders. Moreover, the concepts which dominate scientific thought at any given stage of its development must be modified, revised, and supplemented as science advances. Then a conceptual characterization of a given phenomena which was used at an earlier stage may not be at a later stage as, for instance, the judgment ‘A light-ray consists of a stream of moving particles’, drawn from Newtonian optics was later replaced by ‘A light-ray consists of electromagnetic waves’. Schlick’s new understanding of concept-formation allows him to seriously address the question of how the respective intuitive spaces of each of the senses are coordinated in the construction of a general intuitive space, which is not specific to any particular sense modality. The intuitive images of experience are spatially ordered, since they exhibit relative locations as well as spatial extension. In addition, since experiences occur one after another, they also exhibit an intuitive temporal order. This results in a distinct spatio-temporal ordering for each of the sense modalities, so that an intuitive order of smells, as well as an intuitive order of tastes (and so forth) are given in experience. The first step in the advance from purely subjective experiences to the transcendent reality of scientific objects is to coordinate the spatio-temporal frameworks of the distinct sense modalities. Thus, when a sore spot on one’s leg is touched by one’s forefinger, the feeling of the touch is accompanied by a visual image of the finger touching the leg. The coincidence of these two separate and distinct types of sensory data contributes evidence to the overall coordination of the spatio-temporal orders of the different sense modalities. This is the method of point-coincidences which Schlick applied to characterize the advance to knowledge of the transcendent world from the purely subjective domain of qualitative images. Of course, the idea of point-coincidences also plays a central role in General Relativity and it has generally been assumed that Schlick picked up the idea from his work on the new physics. But recent scholarship has demonstrated that, in fact, Schlick worked on the notion long before Einstein published the General Theory and may well have been Einstein’s source of the notion (Engler 2009, 135ff). The important point in the present context is that the coordination of a single individual’s sense modalities is but the first step in the construction of the transcendent order. The next phase consists of the coordination of point-coincidences among different individuals. If an instructor wishes to draw attention to some feature of a triangle on a blackboard at the front of a class, he points to the feature, thus effecting a point-coincidence between the tip of his finger and the feature of the triangle. And even though everyone witnessing the demonstration has a different perspective, what they all share is their observation of the point-coincidence of finger-tip and the geometric feature.  Further, it is to be noted that not every sensory point-coincidence is an objective one and it is generally true that not every objective point-coincidence is observed directly but is constructed or inferred from ones that are. Finally, all measurements, all determinations of space and time, are based on just such spatio-temporal point-coincidences (Schlick 2009, Sec. 31). Earlier Schlick had argued that knowledge consists in the identification of that which is known with that as which it is known or, in other words, knowledge consists in the relation of one thing to some other thing, as which it is known. And this is only achieved when one of the objects which is known is, in turn, related to still others, as it is in the myriad spatio-temporal relations in which it stands to other objects. Ultimately, all these relations can be known quantitatively by specifying a number of magnitudes, thus reducing the relations of the objective spatio-temporal order to quantities. Of course, this cannot be achieved within the qualitative order since the different relations of position and temporal order are qualitatively different and cannot, for that very reason, be compared. But the entities populating the objective spatio-temporal order are wholly unlike the denizens of the subjective realm which are the intuitive objects of experience, the immediately given sensory data. Both may be univocally designated by implicitly defined concepts and both kinds of entities are, therefore, objects of possible knowledge. As such, intuitive contents are attributed full reality and, in addition, the objects populating the spatio-temporal order, the entities of advanced theoretical science, are just as real as the contents of consciousness with which they are correlated. Schlick expended considerable effort discussing the differences between intuitive acquaintance and conceptual knowledge, insisting that, even though intuitive images are real, acquaintance with them does not constitute knowledge. This thesis directly confronts the idea, held by a number of philosophers, that acquaintance with intuitive contents is, indeed, a species of knowledge which is more direct and immediate than conceptual knowledge. By comparison, scientific knowledge is regarded as a poor substitute, lacking the intimacy of intuitive acquaintance. Two champions of this belief are  Henri Bergson, who thought that direct access to intuitive contents could (somehow) ‘unite’ the knower with the object known, and  Edmund Husserl, who proposed that a genuinely philosophical intuition could become the basis of a kind of scientific cognition in which the subject is in direct contact with its object, without any symbolism or mathematics, any inferences or proofs (Bergson 1955; Husserl 1965).  Bergson called this intimate perception of objects ‘intuition’ and Husserl called it ‘wesenschau’. But the reason why intuition can never constitute knowledge is, of course, quite obvious to Schlick. On his view, knowledge requires two terms: that which is known and that, as which, it is known. But intuition, considered as an act of consciousness, involves only that which is intuited.  In short, the attempt to identify intuition as a form of knowledge is simply a conflation of knowledge with acquaintance, of unelaborated, direct perception or sensation with conceptual knowledge, of kennen with erkennen (Schlick 2009, Sec. 12). Schlick’s discussion of the differences between intuition and knowledge laid the groundwork for his treatment of realism. He cautioned, at the outset of his discussion, that the question of realism is not a philosophical problem, but an everyday one. And the view that guides the comings and goings of ordinary life is naïve realism, which assumes that reality consists simply of the objects of sense perception. Of course, the demands of day-to-day affairs seldom require any distinction between the perception of an object and the object perceived, until one encounters an illusion which demands the differentiation of, say, a mirage from a puddle or pond. Only then is a representation first distinguished from its object. It is at this point that the ordinary person realizes that the mirage was real but that the pond or puddle was not.  Thus refined, the naïve criterion of reality is extended beyond the reach of the senses once it is realized that, even when an object is not perceived, its effects provide a sufficient condition of its reality, as when a hunter finds a ravaged animal in the forest and concludes that a predator is in the neighborhood. And it is in precisely this way that naïve realism is naturally extended to include, not just perceptions themselves as well as the objects perceived, but also the causal sources of observed effects. In this way, naïve realism naturally leads to classical causal realism. Then it simply becomes useful to refer to those objects which are not given in sensory experience – or at least not presently given – as ‘things-in-themselves’ since they are, by the causal criterion, real. Things-in-themselves are just the transcendent entities of the objective, three-dimensional world of everyday material objects, as well as the unobservable, theoretical entities postulated by contemporary science. Unsurprisingly, the reality of these entities is contested by a variety of related views, which Schlick classifies as ‘immanence’ philosophies. The most prominent immanence view is the kind of phenomenalism found in thinkers from John Stuart Mill to contemporaries like Joseph Petzoldt, Ernst Mach, and (as Schlick added in the second edition of General Theory …), Bertrand Russell. More curious, perhaps, is that Schlick also indicted his intellectual forebear, Hermann von Helmholtz, as an immanence philosopher. Basically, these thinkers all restrict reality to the given, so that reality consists exclusively of colors, tastes, and smells, as well as other sensations, presented in constantly changing combinations with one another. This is, of course, just to deny the reality of transcendent objects, thus abjuring the causal realism implicit in everyday and scientific talk of transcendent objects which exist and endure beyond momentary sensations. Instead, the immanence thinkers claim that all talk of transcendent objects consists entirely of discourse about complexes of sensations which exhibit more stability and constancy than others. Mach stated the common view of immanence philosophies that material bodies do not produce sensations, because bodies are, at bottom, nothing more than complexes of sensations (Schlick 2009, Sec. 25). Of course, immanence views differ among themselves in their efforts to identify which particular complexes of sensation are identified with everyday material bodies and scientific entities, especially when the latter are not perceived. The classic immanence view is one which identifies material bodies with the combinations of sensations which would appear, in a given situation, if a perceiver were present. Of course, this is just John Stuart Mill’s definition of bodies as ‘permanent possibilities of sensation’ – a treatment which persists in the writings of many of his followers, in one form or another.  For instance, Bertrand Russell, in Our Knowledge of the External World, calls the stable combinations ‘aspects’, declaring that “Things are those series of aspects which obey the laws of physics” (Russell 1922, 110). Specifically, Russell argued that so-called ‘ideal aspects’ – ones which are not presently perceived – may be logically constructed from those which are. Their reality may then be readily assumed. But with this assumption, any grounds of distinguishing between given aspects and assumed ones vanishes, nor is there any means of recovering them, without complicating the system beyond all recognition. Schlick noted that, because of Russell’s sheer audacity in pushing his account to the limit, the result is not prone to the inconsistencies which plague other accounts. Indeed, it is undeniable that Russell’s “bold position” is one of the most successful efforts to carry out the immanence philosophy (Schlick 2009, 502). In a different vein, Joseph Petzoldt acknowledged that esse is not the same as percipi, though he then endeavored to identify the existence of objects with some limited group of sensations, a different group for each perceiver. Despite the countless problems this approach encountered, the critical point which Petzoldt missed is simply that it is impossible to simply identify any particular sensation or group of sensations with a material body, without further conditions relating the sensation or sensations (as, for instance, Russell provided) (Russell 1922, 106). And that is because it is the lawful regularity among sensations which warrants the collection of the series of changing sensations under a single material body. Mach very nearly realized this when, in The Analysis of Sensation, he abandoned Mill’s ‘possibilities’ and replaced them with the mathematical notion of a functional relation. But such a purely mathematical idea can never be substituted for an empirically-based concept of reality. Such efforts are, at bottom, attempts to conceptually embody a law, as epitomized in Helmholtz’ “The Conservation of Force: A Memoir” (Kahl 1977, pp. 49–50).  Specifically, Helmholtz identified the objective power of a law with force, thus reducing the reality of material bodies and scientific entities to a conceptual substitute. But concepts, according to Schlick, can never possess the reality of the contents of consciousness or transcendent things-in-themselves (Schlick 2009, Sec. 25).