 This section addresses some more technical issues that have been sidestepped or ignored in earlier sections. We have frequently considered the narrow content of Oscar's beliefs about water, for instance his belief that water is wet. Is the mental state we are concerned with here a type or a token? That is, are we concerned with a particular instance of a mental state, which occurs at a particular place and time, namely Oscar's belief on this particular occasion that water is wet, or are we concerned with a general kind of belief, the belief that water is wet, which many different people could have on many different occasions? It seems that it cannot be the general type of belief that we are interested in here, at least not if the type in question is “belief that water is wet,” since different people (or even the same person on different occasions) could have beliefs of this type which had different narrow contents. Oscar is ignorant of the molecular structure of water; he identifies water as a clear, odorless, colorless substance that falls from the skies and fills the lakes. As we have already seen, Twin Oscar shares Oscar's narrow content, but in his environment this narrow content determines that he believes that XYZ is wet, not that water is wet. However, an earthly expert chemist who has done years of laboratory research on water, and is well aware of its molecular structure, will have a different water-concept than Oscar does, and his belief that water is wet will have a different narrow content than Oscar's does. The chemist's Twin Earth duplicate does not believe that XYZ is wet, since he is aware of the chemical composition of water and his beliefs explicitly concern H2O. He believes that water is wet (though he also believes, falsely, that the substance that fills the lakes and emerges from the taps is water). Although Oscar and the chemist share the (broad) belief that water is wet, they have different narrow contents associated with this belief. So when we say that it is a belief that has a particular narrow content, we cannot be speaking of a general type of belief, at least not if the type is determined by the broad content of the belief. Rather, we must be speaking of a particular token belief, in this case Oscar's belief on a particular occasion that water is wet. We cannot completely evade issues about the nature of the token mental states we are considering, however. Even if the object of our concern is a particular token, we need to know how to identify the particular token we are interested in. Compare: suppose we decided we wanted to know the weight of a certain animal. A first question would be whether we are talking about a type of animal or a token animal. In this case we almost certainly intend to refer to the token rather than the type. (If the token belongs to a type of animal all or most of whose tokens have weights that fall in a fairly narrow range, we may later decide that we can also assign a weight to the type, but it is the weight of the tokens that is primary.) In this case there seems to be no problem: we can easily determine the weight of this animal, and even determine what its weight would be in other environments, without deciding whether the relevant type might be Pomeranians, or dogs, or canines, for example. However, our ability to determine the weight of a token animal depends on the fact that we already know what animals are and how to identify them. If someone told us to find the weight of that thing over there, we would need a further specification of the thing in question before we could find its weight. Which thing? The dog? The dog's front leg? The dog's fur? The cat over there next to the dog? Or possibly even the disjoint thing consisting of both the cat and the dog? It is not clear that asking about the narrow content of Oscar's belief that water is wet is a much more clearly defined task than asking about the weight of that thing over there. Do we really have a means of picking out the mental state in question in a way that distinguishes it from other beliefs in the vicinity? What properties does it have? For example, does it have a syntactic structure? Is it an intrinsic state? Does it have a particular location in the brain? Is it entirely distinct from Oscar's beliefs that water is a liquid, that water can form droplets, and that water feels a certain way to the touch? The problem of identifying the bearer of narrow content is obviously closely related to the problem of what to hold constant when employing the diagonalization strategy. But the problem may also affect views on which we do not need to require that a token state be present in a counterfactual situation in order to determine whether its narrow content would be true in that situation. It still seems that in order to know exactly what question we are asking, we need to know what it is whose content we are evaluating in the counterfactual situations. We need to know what the token state is in the actual world whether or not we insist on its presence in the counterfactual one. The discussion so far has presupposed that the mental states that have narrow contents are what we might call local mental states. For instance, we might want to know the narrow content of Oscar's belief that water is wet without wanting to know the narrow content of the rest of his beliefs. However, an alternative possibility is that narrow contents cannot be parceled out belief-by-belief in this way. It could be that the best we can do is to find the narrow content of a subject's total belief state, the subject's complete understanding of what the world is like. It could still make sense to discuss narrow contents less all-encompassing than one's total narrow belief content: we might say that any necessary consequence of the subject's total narrow content is also a narrow content of the subject's belief. On a holistic view, though, there need not be an identifiable distinct belief state by virtue of which the subject has that narrow content, whereas on a particularist view there will be. Whether holism or particularism is correct may depend on the correct view of the nature of mental representations. On one extremely influential view (Fodor 1987, and many other writings), cognitive states are best thought of as relations to internal representations. These representations are thought of as similar to expressions in a natural language; indeed, Fodor describes these mental representations as a “language of thought.” On this view, Oscar's belief that water is wet will be understood as a relation to a sentence-like internal representation. This view may permit a particularist understanding of narrow content (although it is also possible to combine particularism about mental representations with holism about their content; see Block 1991). On the other hand, Frank Jackson has suggested that we might represent the world by means of something more like a map than like a collection of sentences (Jackson 1996; Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson 1996). If this is the right understanding of representational mental states, then we would expect holism rather than particularism to be true. As Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson note, a map “says which island is the largest by saying something about the size of all the islands, and it says something about the size of any particular island in the course of saying something about where it is and what shape it is” (p. 183). Although the map does convey particular bits of information, we cannot neatly identify these bits of information with particular pieces of the map. Whether the content of a particular state is narrow or not depends on whether it would be shared by the corresponding state of every duplicate of the subject who has the state. But this means that whether the content of a state is narrow depends on how we individuate the subject who has the state. A content that is broad relative to one subject might be narrow relative to another, more inclusive subject. I might have an internal state that represents the condition of a particular cone in my retina. If we take the subject in this case to be me — all of me — this content might be narrow, while if we construe the subject more narrowly as, say, my brain, then the very same content of the very same state will be broad rather than narrow (since a duplicate state could have a different content if hooked up to a different kind of eye). For at least some purposes, for instance discussing brain-in-a-vat skeptical scenarios, we will no doubt want to construe the subject very narrowly, while for other purposes we might want to include such external objects as a notebook or PDA as part of the subject's memory (Clark and Chalmers 1998).