 Anticipating the current revival in interest in neutral monism by a few decades, Kenneth Sayre (1929–) published his main ideas on neutral monism in the 1970s. Unlike the big three, Sayre finds the neutral base of his system not in experience, but in the Platonic realm of pure information, where information is understood in the strict information theoretical sense. His proposal must not be mistaken for the uncontroversial claim that that mental and physical processes can be described in information theoretic terms. Sayre puts forward an ontological claim about the ultimate nature of reality—that ultimate reality consists of informational states: If the project…is successful, it will have been shown not only that the concept of information provides a primitive for the analysis of both the physical and the mental, but also that states of information…existed previously to states of mind. Since information in this sense is prior to mentality, but also implicated in all mental states, it follows that information is prior also in the ontological sense…Success of the present project thus will show that an ontology of informational states is adequate for an explanation of the phenomena of mind, as distinct from an ontology of physical events. [And Sayre adds:] It is a reasonable conjecture that an ontology of information is similarly basic to the physical sciences…. (Sayre 1976: 16) The greatest challenge faced by the traditional versions of neutral monism is to show how basic entities that are derived from experience can be neutral, rather than mental. By choosing an ontology of informational states as his “neutral stuff”, Sayre elegantly bypasses this problem. But while the neutrality of informational states may be taken for granted, the question of the relationship of this abstract “stuff” to concrete world of physical and mental entities becomes all the more pressing. Sayre’s main work on neutral monism is his 1976. More recently David Chalmers has explored the idea of an informational ontology (see Chalmers 1996). And the related ideas that ultimate reality purely structural (Ladyman and Ross 2007; Floridi 2008, 2009), that it is a computational process (Fredkin 2003; Lloyd 2006), or a purely mathematical (Tegmark 2014) are the subject of a lively discussion. In his recent book The Realistic Empiricism of Mach, James, and Russell. Neutral Monism Reconceived (2014), Erik Banks presents a critical survey of the big three of neutral monism, as well as his own development of the doctrine. The neutral monist core of Banks’s view amounts to this: individual events are neutral, neither mental nor physical. Neutral events make up “physical” systems and extensions and “mental” sensations in minds through different functional relations. (Banks 2014: 203) This is very much in keeping with the traditional version of neutral monism, especially the event-based flavor of the view that Russell advocated in the years after 1927. But Banks embeds this core idea into a larger metaphysical framework. The resulting theory is thoroughly original. In a first step, Banks explains how this core idea fits into a larger a posteriori physicalist picture. Physicalism, according to Banks, is best thought of as the view that mental supervenes on the physical. Standard physicalism focuses on the question of how mental properties and relations depend physical properties and relations. But standard physicalism does not specify the nature of the entities that exemplify these properties and relations. Any set of entities will do, so long as the supervenience relationships between the physical and mental properties and relations are preserved. Enhanced physicalism goes beyond standard physicalism in specifying the nature of the entities that bear or instantiate the relevant properties and relations: In enhanced physicalism…the instantiation of all physical properties are individualized event particulars in causal-functional relations to each other. (Banks 2014: 147) This is how the neutral events slot into the enhanced physicalist picture that Banks favors. In a second step, Banks provides us with an account of events. Events have, and are individuated by, intrinsic characters or concrete qualities. None of those qualities are mental; but experience familiarizes us with some of those qualities (see Banks 2014: 6). These qualities are the ways certain powers manifest themselves in events (see Banks 2014: 6). Examples of the sorts of powers (or energies) are electromagnetism, gravitation, and nuclear forces, and, most relevant in the present context, neural energy—the internal energies in neurons (see Banks 2014,149, 203). Manifesting itself qualitatively at the level of the single neuron, this energy may yield an electrical discharge event; but manifesting itself at the level of a complex brain event—an event that is “somehow ‘composed’ of neurons firing in some kind of cluster” (Banks 2014: 147)—this very same neural energy may yield the event that is a sensation of blue. This closes the apparent chasm between the experience of blue and the firing of a bunch of neurons, once it is understood that the quality blue and the individual electrical discharges are just different and mutually exclusive manifestations of the same natural powers which we mistakenly see as belonging to totally different categories of event. (Banks 2014: 164) This is an attractive picture, but it is difficult to see it as a monism of neutral events. Wherein does the neutrality of these events—an experience of blue and neural firing events—consist? It does appear, moreover, that events (whether neutral or not) no longer play a fundamental ontological role. In their place we find the powers/energies that give rise to events. Banks addresses this second problem head on. Powers are identical with their token manifestations, identical with the events that consist in the individual qualities wherein these powers manifest  themselves[8]  (see Banks 2014: 149). That is, there is no separate, more fundamental level of reality underlying the events. The powers just are the events. The neural energy is identical with the event that is the electrical discharges of a group of neurons; this same neural energy is also identical with event that is a sensation of blue. But, and this is a crucial part of Banks’s view, the discharge events are not identical with the blue sensation. Banks sees the question that this poses clearly: how can it be the case that the powers are identical with each of their token manifestations and even identical qua powers across different token manifestation events, but that different token manifestation events are not identical to each other? (Banks 2014: 149) This is not an easy knot to unravel. Perhaps an appeal to relative identity might help. Assuming that the fundamentality of events has been established, we still face the question in which sense they qualify as neutral. Consider the event of seeing a blue patch and the event of having all the configured neurons fire in the region of the brain responsible for seeing the blue patch. (Banks 2014: 164) To the naïve opinion that the first of these events is mental, while the second is physical, Banks replies as follows: The phenomenon of sensation simply falls into place as a certain type of physical event among others in nature. The separate category of mental phenomena simply ceases to exist, except as a provisional way of talking. (Banks 2014: 164) The monism expressed in this answer is beyond reasonable doubt; but the neutrality is somewhat elusive. For want of a better label, John Heil has presents his view on the mind-body relation as a form of neutral monism. He resists being labeled a materialist because it carries with it the implication that there is an asymmetryin the identification of mental qualities with material qualities: the mental is supplanted by the material. (Heil 2013: 242) Nor does he see himself as an idealist. And he has systematic and deep reasons for rejecting the property dualism that characterizes the various versions of nonreductive materialism. The neutral monism that he accepts is characterized as follows: Neutral monism includes the denial that there is a mental–material chasm to be bridged. The mental–material distinction is, as Spinoza and Donald Davidson contend, a distinction of conception only, not a realdistinction, not a distinction in reality. (Heil 2013: 242) An example will help to illustrate the gist of this view. Take the well-worn claim that pain is c-fiber  stimulation.[9]  According to Heil, this says that the predicate “c-fiber stimulation” and the predicate “pain” apply to the same things: all things that are truly described as being c-fiber stimulations are also truly described as pains. But—and this is a crucial claim that cannot be developed here—this does not mean that there is a property of being a c-fiber stimulation and a property of being a pain, and that these two properties stand in some interesting relationship, such as identity, reduction, realization, etc. What this does mean is that there is a complex object that makes both of these claims true. The nature of the parts of this object, as well as their intricate relationships to one another, is the reality that is correctly described as a c-fiber stimulation and as a pain. This part of Heil’s account appears to be consistent with the spirit of traditional neutral monism. One is reminded of Russell’s pithy description of his project: “What I wish to do in this essay is to restate the relations of mind and brain in terms not implying the existence of either” (Russell 1956a: 145). This can easily be read as a denial of the existence of a chasm between mental and physical properties. And Heil’s complex objects that serve as the truth-makers for mental and physical descriptions may be seen as analogous to Russell’s groups (logical constructions) of events that can properly be described in physical and mental terms. This makes for a significant parallel between the two views. But there is an additional part to the neutral monist picture—one that all of the mainline neutral monists agree on—that Heil rejects. When he tells the “deep story” (Heil’s term) about the nature of the complex objects (the truth-makers for claims about c-fibers and pains etc.), he turns to fundamental physics: I take it to be an empirical question—a question for science, for fundamental physics—what the substances are and what they are like, how they are. (Heil 2013: 201–2) So the basic constituents of the world—the substances and the properties—that Heil describes are, in the best sense of the term, physical. Here the neutral monist (who is committed to the Neither View of neutrality parts company with Heil. The deep story of the neutral monist has it that the fundamental entities—be they events, bits of information, substances, properties, etc.—are not physical (and not mental, of course). That is to say, they are not the sort of thing that fundamental physics (or psychology) reveals. In his recent book Mind and Cosmos (2012) Thomas Nagel asserts that “the weight of the evidence favors some form of neutral monism over the traditional alternatives of materialism, idealism, and dualism” (2012: 5). Neutral monism is understood as a view that “accounts for the relation between mind and brain in terms of something more basic about the natural order” (2012: 56). This yields a picture of a “general monism according to which the constituents of the universe have properties that explain not only its physical but its mental character” (2012: 56). Borrowing a concept from Tom Sorrell (whom Nagel cites approvingly), we can say that these basic constituents of the universe are “transphysical and transmental” (2012: 57). This nicely captures the relevant sense of neutrality. The claim that all of the basic constituents must be of the same kind—the conclusion that we are dealing with a monism—is supported by the consideration that any basic constituent could be part of a psychophysical creature, such as ourselves. Hence every basic constituent must be of the kind that can explain the physical and mental traits as we know them. All that has been said up to this point supports the view that Nagel endorses neutral monism. But what Nagel says next seems to contradict this simple picture. He writes: Everything, living or not, is constituted from elements having a nature that is both physical and nonphysical—that is, capable of combining into mental wholes. So this reductive account can also be described as a form of panpsychism: all the elements of the physical world are also mental. (Nagel 2012: 57) Note that the description of the basic constituents has changed from “transphysical and transmental” to “physical and mental”—from the Neither View to the Both View. And Nagel is very much aware that these are not the same thing. In an earlier paper in which he considers neutral monism, he writes: this view would imply that the fundamental constituents of the world, out of which everything is composed, are neither physical nor mental but something more basic. This position is not equivalent to panpsychism. Panpsychism is, in effect, dualism all the way down. This is monism all the way down. (Nagel 2002: 231) Is there a way to overcome this apparent tension and to see these two views as parts of a coherent whole? In a personal communication Prof. Nagel offered the following explanation: the fundamental elements would be neither merely physical nor merely mental, but something that was necessarily both physical and mental, (or protomental); but since this necessary connection can’t hold directly between the physical and the mental as we conceive them, it would require that the real character of these fundamental constituents be something more basic that accounts for their being both physical and (proto)mental. The resulting picture is this. Described at the most fundamental level, the constituents of the world have properties that are neither mental nor physical. These neutral properties of every fundamental entity give rise to physical and mental (or protomental) properties. Thus each fundamental constituent is complex: it has mental (or protomental) properties, it has physical properties, and it has these two sets of properties as a necessary consequence of its having a third set of properties—the neutral properties. The foundational role played by the neutral properties (in the Neither Sense) suggests that the view is a form of neutral monism. This interpretation can be further supported by arguing that the neutral properties ground the other properties of the basic entities, and that grounded properties make for “no addition to being”. Others will object to the neutral monist interpretation of Nagel’s view, insisting that basic entities that have mental and physical properties cannot count as neutral, given the Neither Sense of  neutrality.[10]  The case for calling it a panpsychism rests on the fact that each fundamental entity has mental features. The case for calling it a dual-aspect theory rests on the fact that each fundamental entity has physical and mental features. And if neutrality is understood in the Both Sense, then this very same fact indicates that we are dealing with a version of neutral monism after all. But if one follows the traditional neutral monists in understanding neutrality in the Neither Sense, and if one follows them further in assuming that the properties of being mental and being physical are properties that can only be possessed by groups of basic entities, not by individual basic entities, then it is advisable to deny that Nagel’s view is a version of neutral monism. Perhaps it is best characterized as a form of the dual-aspect theory, or as a form of property dualism, if aspects are distinguished from properties (see section  8.3  below). In the search for a solution to the mind-body problem one may be captivated by the thought that we know less about matter than we are commonly led to believe. All we do (or can) know are the dispositional properties of  matter.[11]  When combined with the insight that dispositions need categorical grounds, one discovers that one’s conception of matter is radically incomplete. In addition to all the dispositional properties that physics treats of, matter must have intrinsic categorical properties. Since the nature of these intrinsic properties is unknown, the following bold thought suggests itself. Perhaps these properties play a dual role: in addition to grounding to dispositional properties of matter, they also serve as the grounds of our conscious experience. These are the kinds of considerations that may lead one to Russellian monism, the view that matter has intrinsic properties that both constitute consciousness and serve as categorical bases for the dispositional properties described in physics. (Alter and Nagasawa 2015: 1) The basic constituents of the world of Russellian monism are the fundamental entities of physics (not the insubstantial events of Russell’s world). But the most fundamental properties of these fundamental entities are not their physical properties, but the intrinsic properties in virtue of which they have those physical properties. And these same intrinsic properties do, when arranged appropriately, give rise to conscious experience. Therein consists the monism of this view: at the bottom there are fundamental entities with certain intrinsic properties; all else is grounded in this fact. There are many versions of Russellian Monism. Differences are due, in part, to varying views about the relations between the intrinsic properties, on the one side, and the mental and physical properties, on the other. But the central disagreement concerns the nature of the intrinsic properties. They have been held to be physical (Montero 2015; Pereboom 2015), mental (Bolender 2001), mental and physical (Strawson 2015, 2016), or neutral (Coleman 2014). Accordingly there are physicalist, idealist (mentalist), and neutral monist versions or Russellian monism. The precise nature of these disagreements are difficult to pin down, given the number of different notions of the mental and the physical that are in play in this discussion. The best known version of Russellian neutral monism is panprotopsychism—a view that David Chalmers has explored over many years (Chalmers 1996, 2015). In the standard form of this theory the postulated intrinsic properties are characterized as being neither experiential (they are proto-psychic) nor physical (they lack the structural/dispositional nature of physical properties). That makes them neutral (in the Neither Sense). But this purely negative characterization of the intrinsic properties has occasioned considerable discomfort. A variant of this theory—panqualityism—addresses this problem in a most satisfactory manner, while creating new problems of its own. It takes redness, greenness, sweetness, roundness, etc.—the primitive sensory qualities given to us in experience, and considered just as such—to be the intrinsic properties of the fundamental physical entities (cf. Chalmers 2015: 272). One’s being aware of redness—i.e., the property of phenomenal redness—is mental, but redness itself is not. Nor is (this kind of) redness a physical, structural property. So panqualityism has secured a neutral base with which we are intimately familiar. Panqualityism has its contemporary defenders—Chalmers points to Sam Coleman’s neutral monist proposal (Coleman 2014). And he boldly conjectures that versions of the view itself were popular among the neutral monists of the early twentieth century, including William James (1904b), Ernst Mach (1886), and Bertrand Russell (1921). (Chalmers 2015: 271) One may wonder how an electron’s being red can ground its negative charge. And one may agree with Chalmers that qualities, no matter how intricately arranged, cannot ground the phenomenal properties of our experience. For “no instantiations of qualities ever necessitate awareness of qualities” (Chalmers 2015: 273). Finally, one may share Wilfrid Sellars’s (1963: 35) view that it makes no sense to think that fundamental physical entities might have primitive sensory qualities like redness. What the consideration of Russellian Monism shows is that (i) new versions of neutral monism are currently being developed that borrow relatively little from the ideas of traditional neutral monism; (ii) but even the most developed versions of Russellian neutral monism face considerable problems.