 The traditional versions of neutral monism of Mach, James, and Russell reflect the empiricist outlook of their authors. This leads them to turn to experience, when searching for their neutral entities. And this leads us to see their doctrines as tainted by mentalism. Perhaps the traditional neutral monists were wrong to forge this tight link between the neutral entities and experience. Perhaps we are too quick in dismissing their efforts to discover a neutral base in this area. The rising interest in the history of analytic philosophy, the gradual rediscovery of Russell as a metaphysician and epistemologist, and the existence of new work such as Erik Banks’s new study of traditional neutral monism (Banks 2014) hold out some hope for better understanding of traditional neutral monism. But the fortunes of neutral monism are no longer exclusively tied to the fate of traditional neutral monism. The neutral monist strand within the broader movement of Russellian monism (see section  5.5  above) is a promising new development. Despite invoking Russell’s name, these versions of neutral monism explore fresh ideas that hold out hope for a new life for neutral monism. And some contemporary attempts to revive neutral monism are free of any ties to the traditional versions of the doctrine. Thomas Nagel’s recent defense of neutral monism comes to mind (see section  5.4).  And the idea to make abstract entities—information, structure, computation, mathematical reality—into the neutral basis of a metaphysical system is being actively developed by philosophers and scientists alike (see section  5.1). Until quite recently it seemed that neutral monism (in its traditional form) was a brief and unimportant sideshow on the grand stage of metaphysics. Notwithstanding the fact that the three main protagonists—Mach, James, and Russell—were important figures, whose ideas profoundly influenced many areas of contemporary thought, their speculations about neutral monism seemed to have vanished from the philosophical scene. But the current wave of interest in the traditional versions of neutral monism, as well as the lively development of alternative versions of neutral monism, indicate that neutral monism may, once more, become a live option in the ongoing efforts to explore the metaphysics of mind.