 Both of the terms that make up the label “neutral monism” are problematical. Because the questions to which the notion of neutrality gives rise are unique to neutral monism, they need to be addressed first. Most versions of neutral monism assume a plurality of basic, neutral entities (these could be substances, events, tropes, universals, etc., depending on the specific version of neutral monism in question). What does it mean for an entity to be neutral? Here are five proposals: (1)–(5) are not always clearly distinguished; but even when they are, two or more of these criteria may be used concurrently. This invites confusion on the part of the neutral monists, as well as their critics. Questions arise about the relationships between (1)–(5). (1) and (5) are similar in letting the question of an entity’s neutrality be settled by its intrinsic nature. (2)–(4) answer this question by looking at the relationships of a given entity to other things: to the nature of larger groups of entities of which the given entity is/can be a member: are these groups mental or physical? Or by looking to the kinds of laws that govern the entity in question: are the laws mental or physical? If one is inclined to think that neutrality is a matter of intrinsic nature alone, (2)–(4) will seem misguided. (2)–(4) still might have a place as epistemic criteria—as ways of finding out whether a given entity is neutral. The friends of (1) and (5) can agree that a given entity’s ability to actually or possibly belong to a certain group, or to be governed by certain laws, is due solely to its intrinsic nature. Their disagreement concerns only the question whether this ability is conferred on that entity by its being both mental and physical or neither mental or nor physical. In either case (2)–(4) can only be used to discover which things are the neutral entities. The traditional versions of neutral monism—those developed by Ernst Mach, William James, and Bertrand Russell (see section  4  below)—accept (1) and reject (2). But some critics of neutral monism, notably Bostock (2012: 190, 195–6), interpret neutral monism as committed to (2). Based on this interpretation of neutrality, Bostock arrives at the striking conclusion that “Russell’s version of neutral monism was never properly ‘neutral’ or ‘monistic’” (Bostock 2012: 190). It can be argued that none of the traditional neutral monists accept (3). All of them would agree that neutral entities can be a constituent of both physical and mental non-basic entities. But it is doubtful whether any of them would agree that the fact that a basic entity can be a constituent of both physical and mental non-basic entities is sufficient to make it neutral. For it is conceivable that a basic entity that fails to be neutral (according to (1), the Neither View) should figure in the construction of both physical and mental non-basic entities. Gregory Landini’s influential discussion of Russell’s neutral monism (Landini 2011: ch. 6) illustrates the importance of the distinction between criteria (1) and (3). Landini assumes that (3) captures Russell’s idea of neutrality. This allows Landini to conclude that Russell is a physicalist and a neutral monist (see Landini, 280, 291, 297). According to Landini, Russell is a neutral monist because every basic entity can be a constituent of both physical and mental non-basic entities; and Russell is a physicalist because all basic entities of his system are  physical.[1] (4)  is present in the thought of Mach and James. But it plays a prominent part in Russell’s thought. His use of (1) in conjunction with (4), especially in Russell 1921, is confusing, and it has led a number of his critics (Stace 1946; Bostock 2012) to argue that (at least his early) neutral monism is best understood as a form of dualism. The traditional neutral monists reject  (5),  but many of their formulations suggest otherwise. It is easy to find passages saying that a given neutral entity is physical and mental. A sympathetic reading of these passages suggests that they are best understood as an abbreviated way of saying that this neutral entity is a member of two groups of neutral entities, one of which counts as physical, the other of which counts as mental. The terms “physical” and “mental” apply to groups of neutral entities, not to individual neutral entities, as Russell points out when speaking about the mental: “mental” is a character, like “harmonious” or “discordant”, that cannot belong to a single entity in its own right, but only to a system of entities. (Russell 1927b: 209) But a number of contemporary discussions of neutral monism employ the Both View. (1)–(5) use the concepts of the mental and the physical (or of corresponding laws) to specify the notion of neutrality. Since the mind/matter distinction can be drawn in different ways, the notion of the neutral will vary accordingly. And if the mental and the physical are defined as complements of each other, thereby ruling out the possibility of entities that are neither mental nor physical, then there cannot be any neutral entities (at least in the neither sense of the term). Another feature shared by (1)–(5) is that they all fail to meet a condition—discussed by C.D. Broad in his 1925—that an attribute must meet if it is to carve out a class of entities. If neutrality is to be a kind-forming attribute, it “must be a simple attribute, i.e., it must not be analysable into a conjunction or disjunction of other attributes” (Broad 1925: 23). If one accepts this kind of homogeneity constraint on neutral entities, all five criteria of neutrality proposed above fail to pick out a set of entities that are sufficiently simple or homogeneous to form a kind. A related worry is that (1)–(4) don’t say anything about the nature of neutral entities. (1) says only what they are not; (2)–(4) specify certain roles that neutral entities can play, without telling us anything about the nature of the role occupants. (5) may fare better in this regard; but it raises problems of its own (see below). Some versions of neutral monism embrace this agnosticism about the nature of the neutral base. David Chalmers has outlined the idea of Russellian neutral monism (see section  5.5  below) with “fundamental protophenomenal properties serving as the grounds for both physical and phenomenal properties” (Chalmers 2015: 264). Nothing is known about the protophenomenal other than its ability to ground the two kinds of properties we are familiar with. Many neutral monists have been more forthcoming, offering examples of neutral entities with which we are familiar. The three traditional neutral monists—Ernst Mach, William James, and Bertrand Russell—all pointed to experience, when attempting to provide examples of neutral entities. Mach speaks of sensations, James of pure experience, and Russell of sensations and percepts. Predictably, this fueled the suspicion that neutral monism is nothing but rebranded phenomenalism. Others have sought the neutral base in the realm of the abstract. Kenneth Sayre, for example, turns to the mathematical theory of information and suggests that the neutral base is to be understood as the “ontology of informational states” (Sayre 1976: 16) that this theory presupposes. Most traditional versions of neutral monism were based on  (1),  the idea that the neutral is neither mental nor material. But occasionally the understanding of neutrality is informed by criterion (5): the neutral is that which is both mental and material. This view has been attributed to Thomas Nagel (Godfrey-Smith 2013: 1–2; Skrbina 2005: 237; but see also section  5.4).  That which is both mental and material is biased towards neither and hence neutral between them. In this way the both-interpretation captures an intuitive notion of neutrality. Moreover, (5) may tell us much more about the nature of the neutral entities than (1)–(4) do—just how much we learn about the nature of the neutral will depend on how the relevant concepts of the mental and the physical are fleshed  out.[2] The appeal of the Both Interpretation of the idea of neutrality is undeniable. But it invites the conflation of neutral monism with other theories from which is should be distinguished. First, there is the family of theories that attribute fundamental and irreducible mental and fundamental and irreducible material properties, or aspects, or sides to every basic entity (see section  8.3).  The Both Interpretation of neutral monism turns it into a version of the dual-aspect theory—a theory that is often viewed as a form of dualism. Second, the Both Interpretation of neutrality makes it difficult to distinguish neutral monism from the identity theory. According to the identity theory “being a pain” and “being a c-fiber stimulation” pick out the very same property (not two distinct and irreducible properties, aspects, etc.). A natural way to state this idea is to say that a given property or state is both mental and physical. And this then invites confusion with neutral monism, stated in terms of  (5)—the  Both Interpretation. The Neither Interpretation of neutrality allows us to understand neutral monism as a distinct type of theory. Because of its ability to distinguish views that are run together on the Both Interpretation, the Neither Interpretation is preferable.