 According to an entailment account of ontological commitment: A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks if and only if T entails that Ks exist. One must speak of an entailment account because different entailment relations lead to different accounts of ontological commitment; the challenge is to find the right entailment relation. But in any case, entailment accounts do not “look to the values of the variables” for the ontological commitments of a theory. Quantifiers and variables have no privileged role; they figure into the ontological commitments of a theory only to the extent that they figure into the entailments of the theory, just as with other components of the sentences of the theory. Entailment accounts, as understood here, have the feature that ontological commitment depends only on the content of a theory, not on its logical form. (Thus, the metalinguistic account discussed in §1.4 is not included.)  Two theories that have the same content, then, have the same ontological commitments. If we say that theories have the same content just when they mutually entail one another, then each entailment account comes with its own notion of content; the problem of finding the right entailment relation is just the problem of finding the right notion of content, the notion that is relevant to ontological commitment. It is convenient, though not obligatory, to hypostasize content and speak of the propositions expressed by the sentences of the theory. That allows us to neatly separate the problem of determining the ontological commitments of a theory (set of sentences) into two components: What propositions are expressed by the sentences of the theory? And, what are the ontological commitments, that is, the existential entailments, of those propositions? Indeed, we could then choose to construe theories as sets of propositions and treat all talk of sentences as outside the bounds of an account of ontological commitment proper. But propositions are controversial entities, not accepted by all parties to the debate. To maintain neutrality, we will continue to apply ontological commitment to theories construed as sets of sentences, but with the understanding that, for the friend of propositions, the ontological commitment of sentences is just the ontological commitment of the propositions those sentences express. The principle advantage of entailment accounts over quantifier accounts is that they have no problem with implicit ontological commitment. (Or, more exactly, since different entailment accounts will differ as to what counts as implicit content, entailment accounts have no problem with what counts as implicit ontological commitment by that account's own standards.) If ‘∃x Human(x)’ entails not only that humans exist, but that humanity exists, then it is ontologically committed to properties or universals, even though no property or universal is the value of any quantified variable. If ‘∃x Parent(x)’ entails that children exist, then ‘∃x Parent(x)’ is ontologically committed to children, again, even though it need not “quantify over” any children. An entailment account, unlike the quantifier account, gets these cases right—supposing, that is, we want our account to capture implicit ontological commitment. For a stark illustration of the difference between entailment and quantifier accounts, consider a theory T that contains the single sentence ‘∃x K(x)’ and the theory T* that contains the single sentence ‘True(T)’ (see Peacock (2011: 81–2), who calls T* a “meta-theory”). T and T* mutually entail one another (assuming ‘K’ is not a semantical predicate); they thus have the same ontological commitments on an entailment account. And this seems right.  Surely, a philosopher cannot eliminate her commitment to Ks by switching from T to T*; it matters not that T*'s commitment to Ks is only implicit. But this implicit ontological commitment is invisible to the quantifier account because T* has no quantificational structure. Once again, by missing implicit commitments, the quantifier account fails to capture the ontological costs of a theory. The principle disadvantage of an entailment account as compared with a quantifier account is that it fails to provide a neutral platform for assessing the ontological costs of theories: disagreements over ontology will often reappear as disagreements over the existential entailments of a theory. Here it is important to distinguish two things that might be meant by “criterion of ontological commitment”. (This isn't always done; but Jackson (1989) and Rayo (2007) are clear on the distinction.) One might mean a test by which ontological commitments can be discovered. Or one might mean an analysis that says what ontological commitment consists in. An adequate test would be a procedure that could be applied by all parties in a neutral way, independently of those parties' prior ontological beliefs. Quine believed that the quantifier criterion provided such a test. He was aware, of course, that there would be disputes over how best to regiment theories within first-order logic. But—or so he thought—once theories were regimented, the quantifier criterion would supply unequivocal verdicts. A correct analysis of ontological commitment, however theoretically valuable, might do nothing towards providing an adequate test. Such an analysis, unaccompanied by a test, would be of little help in determining the ontological costs of theories, or resolving ontological disputes. Entailment accounts have good claim to providing a correct analysis of ontological commitment; but they do not provide a test. For one thing, the parties to an ontological dispute will often disagree as to what propositions are expressed by the sentences of a theory, that is, as to what the truth conditions of those sentences are. Quine's criterion bypasses this problematic step by applying the criterion only to already regimented theories. For a second thing, parties to an ontological dispute will often disagree over the existential entailments of a theory (see §2.2 below).  Quine's criterion (as he understood it) avoids this problem by focusing on the formal relation of logical entailment between sentences, a relation that is well understood. The material relations of entailment between the propositions, however—be they modal, or conceptual, or a priori—are matters of much dispute. If the goal is to find an adequate test for ontological commitment, entailment accounts fall short. Initially, one might have hoped to combine an entailment account, qua analysis, with a quantifier account, qua test. (Arguably, this is the best way to understand Quine's project.) But the problems with implicit commitment suggest that the entailment analysis and the quantifier test do not match up, that the test will undergenerate with respect to the analysis. One could dampen one's ambitions, and be content with a one-sided test, a test that in general provides only a sufficient condition. (This is suggested by Rayo (2007: 432) as a response to the problem of extrinsic properties.) But a one-sided test won't be of much help in comparing the ontological costs of theories. Such comparisons require that all costs be put on the table. The problem of applying an entailment account to ontological disputes is especially acute if the entailment relation is taken to be necessary implication. That choice results in the following criterion (introduced above in §1.5): Modal Entailment Criterion. A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff T necessarily implies that Ks exist iff, for every (metaphysically) possible world w, T is true at w only if the domain of w contains at least one K.[25] On this criterion, every theory is ontologically committed to every necessarily existing kind of entity, what was called above (§1.5) the problem of irrelevant necessary existents. The problem can be ignored when comparing the ontological costs of theories that disagree only over contingently existing kinds: the irrelevant commitments are the same for both theories, and cancel one another out. But many traditional ontological disputes are over the existence of necessarily existing kinds of entity, such as mathematical entities or intensional entities. Consider, for example two theories that disagree only over whether numbers exist. On the modal entailment criterion, these theories have the same ontological commitments; moreover, supposing numbers do exist, the theory that explicitly denies the existence of numbers is nonetheless committed to numbers. Clearly, the modal entailment criterion fails to capture the intuitive notion of ontological commitment.  Applying the criterion in this case will do nothing to further the ontological enterprise. Jackson (1989) highlights the problem of irrelevant necessary existents by comparing the following two arguments: Suppose, for the sake of argument, that non-actual possible worlds necessarily exist. Then the second premises, B2 and C2, are both true on the modal entailment account. Moreover, on the modal entailment account, both of these arguments are necessarily truth preserving. It seems to follow that the conclusion that non-actual possible worlds exist can be supported either by arguing for B1, that modal realism is true, or by arguing for C1, that materialism is true. But, surely, an argument for materialism provides no support for the claim that possible worlds exist. Or, to turn this around, an objection to the claim that possible worlds exist does not cast doubt on materialism. Jackson defends the modal entailment account in the following way. Although the two arguments are on a par with respect to validity, and the truth of their premises, there is an enormous epistemological difference between the arguments. … doubts about the existence of non-actual possible worlds cannot cast doubt on B1, but can cast doubt on C1. (Jackson 1989: 197–8) Thus, there is an epistemological relation between propositions, “casts doubt on”, which holds between CC and C1 but not between CC (=BC) and B1. Or, turning this around once again, there is an epistemological relation—presumably some sort of a priori entailment relation—according to which modal realism entails that non-actual possible worlds exist, but materialism does not entail that non-actual possible worlds exist. Jackson says nothing to further characterize this relation, let alone provide a semantic analysis. But, however the relation is precisely characterized, the natural question to put to Jackson is: why not use that relation, in place of modal entailment, to characterize ontological commitment? For, clearly, this “epistemological” entailment relation better tracks our judgments as to the ontological commitments of theories; and it is the “epistemological” relation, not modal entailment, that will have to be brought to bear when comparing the ontological costs of theories positing necessary existents. Peacock (2011) also defends the modal entailment account from the problem of irrelevant necessary existents. In particular, he argues that the ontological costs of theories positing necessary existents can be compared by considering, not the theories' actual commitments (which cannot be known prior to determining the truth of the theories), but by considering “what ontology we would regard a theory as implicitly committed to, were it true” (Peacock 2011: 93). This suggests that there is some counterfactual relation between propositions according to which—to return to Jackson's example—non-actual possible worlds would have to exist if modal realism were true, but it is not the case that non-actual possible worlds would have to exist if materialism were true. This counterfactual relation, of course, could not be given a standard possible worlds analysis lest it apply vacuously to impossible antecedents. But even supposing a semantics for such a counterfactual relation could be given, the natural question to put to Peacock is: why not use that relation, in place of modal entailment, to characterize ontological commitment? For it is this counterfactual relation, not modal entailment, that will have to be brought to bear when comparing the ontological costs of theories positing necessary existents.[26] In sum: neither Jackson nor Peacock give any positive reason to hold on to a modal entailment account, which is puzzling in light of the fact that each is committed to there being an entailment relation—be it epistemological or counterfactual—that better fits the role that the notion of ontological commitment was introduced to play. If the notion of ontological commitment is to play a role in theory choice or clarifying ontological disputes, then the ontological commitments of a theory must be rationally accessible; failure to acknowledge the ontological commitments of one's theory must be a rational failing (see Michael 2008). That puts the following epistemic constraint on the entailment relation that is invoked by an entailment account of ontological commitment: the entailments of a theory must be knowable by any ideally rational agent, that is to say, must be knowable a priori. Does modal entailment meet this constraint? With respect to the examples considered thus far—theories positing necessary existents—it may depend on how “ideally rational” and “a priori” are understood; some philosophers would argue that entities that necessarily exist can be known a priori to exist. But if (following Kripke 1980) we accept that there are necessary propositions that cannot be known a priori, then modal entailment will run afoul of the epistemic constraint. Suppose, for example, that ‘Water is H2O’ is (metaphysically) necessary but not knowable a priori. Then the theory containing the single sentence, ‘Water exists’, modally entails that hydrogen exists. But, according to the epistemic constraint, the existence of hydrogen should not be an entailment on an entailment account of ontological commitment. It appears that some sort of a priori entailment relation must take the place of modal entailment in the analysis of ontological commitment: A Priori Entailment Criterion. A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff T a priori entails that Ks exist iff, for every conceptually possible world w, T is true at w only if the domain of w contains at least one K.[27] Switching to an a priori entailment relation goes partway towards restoring the applicability of an entailment account to ontological disputes. It allows that philosophers—if ideally rational—will be able to agree on the ontological commitments of propositions. But there is still the problem of determining what propositions are expressed by the sentences of a theory, that is, what the truth conditions of those sentences are. If the sentences are couched within ordinary or philosophical English, so that their truth conditions are not just a matter of stipulation, there may be no resolving the dispute, even among ideally rational philosophers (see §4).