 Carnap was a deflationist about traditional ontological disputes, such as whether numbers exist, or physical objects exist. He held that existence questions could be interpreted in two different ways, internally or externally. When interpreted internally, the question was to be answered relative to a linguistic framework.  If the framework was mathematical, existence questions, such as whether there are prime numbers greater than 1000, were to be answered by means of proof, given the axioms and rules of logic introduced by the framework. If the framework was empirical, existence questions, such as whether electrons exist, were to be answered through observation according to the rules of confirmation and disconfirmation introduced by the framework. When the existence questions involved the most general kinds introduced by the framework, the answers were trivial. In the framework of numbers, it is trivial that numbers exist; in the framework of physical objects, it is trivial that physical objects exist. For it is stipulated in introducing these frameworks that the variables range over numbers, or physical objects. When existence questions are interpreted externally, they purport to be about “reality” independent of any particular linguistic framework. So interpreted, according to Carnap, these questions—such as “do numbers exist?” or “do physical objects exist?”—are pseudo-questions lacking any cognitive meaning. Since metaphysicians engaging in ontological disputes over these questions evidently have the external interpretation in mind—they do not take them to be trivial—much of traditional metaphysics for Carnap was cognitively meaningless as well. The best one can do to make sense of external existence questions is to re-construe them as pragmatic questions as to which frameworks to accept. The question, “do numbers exist”, for example, could be re-construed as the question, “is it useful to introduce the number framework”. A framework could be deemed useful, for example, if it facilitated factual communication in ways that were “efficient, fruitful, and simple” (Carnap 1950). One might wonder whether it is coherent to interpret all meaningful existence questions as internal: don't we need the concept of existence to introduce and meaningfully discuss the frameworks themselves, and their pragmatic virtues? Can it be frameworks “all the way down”? But, for purposes of this article, it suffices to ask how the notion of ontological commitment fits in to Carnap's scheme. One might expect Carnap to tie talk of ontological commitment to external questions, and reject it accordingly: if it is cognitively meaningless to say that Ks exist in reality, then it is cognitively meaningless to say that a theory presupposes or assumes that Ks exist in reality.  But that is not what Carnap did. Rather, he endorsed Quine's quantifier account of ontological commitment, applying it internally; his only reservation had to do with Quine's use of the word ‘ontological’.[48]  For Carnap, a theory always comes packaged with a linguistic framework for interpreting the theory. To say that a theory is ontologically committed to Ks, then, is just to say that according to the rules of the framework-cum-theory, it is true that Ks exist. A philosopher can be said to “accept a kind of entities” when he introduces a linguistic framework that, first, introduces a general term satisfied by all and only entities of that kind and, second, introduces variables to range over all and only those entities (see Carnap 1950: 213). How do Carnap's views relate to Quine's? First, it might well be asked, which of the quantifier accounts canvassed above is Carnap endorsing when he claims to be in agreement with Quine?  Since Carnap clearly allows a philosopher who has not accepted (for pragmatic reasons) some kind of entity to attribute acceptance of that kind to another philosopher, Carnap's view would appear to be closest to the metalinguistic version of Quine's quantifier account. We are making claims about linguistic frameworks, and what follows from the rules of those frameworks; and these claims, at least for Carnap, do not make problematic assertions about “reality”. Second, a consequence of Carnap's view is that theories with different ontological commitments should not be thought of as conflicting. This contrasts sharply with Quine. Because Quine has a single, all-purpose logico-linguistic framework—austere first-order predicate logic—within which all theories are couched for purposes of examining their ontological commitments, theories with differing existential presuppositions genuinely conflict; a philosopher must choose which theory to accept. For Carnap, theories with differing ontological commitments are ipso facto couched within different linguistic frameworks. If there is disagreement, it can only be over the relative pragmatic virtues of the frameworks in question. In this way, Carnap's deflationary approach to ontology carries with it a deflationary approach to ontological commitment. Carnap is a pluralist; a philosopher can choose to accept multiple theories, with differing ontological commitments, without pain of contradiction. Let many flowers bloom (see Carnap 1950: 221). According to Carnap, each linguistic framework comes with its own unrestricted existential quantifier, and thus its own notions of object and existence. No one of these quantifiers is logically or metaphysically privileged over any of the others; there is no neutral standpoint from which one framework can be judged correct and another incorrect. When frameworks appear to disagree—as when one says that arbitrary fusions exist, and another denies it—the dispute is merely verbal; they are using quantifiers with different meanings. This is a form of the doctrine of quantifier variance. One might well wonder: don't we get a single, privileged quantifier by combining all linguistic frameworks, and considering a quantifier that ranges over the union of all the domains of these frameworks? But the question presupposes, in effect, that the notion of “all linguistic frameworks” is meaningful, and there is no reason why Carnap would accept that. Any attempt to introduce a single all-inclusive quantifier that ranges over absolutely everything would be rejected by Carnap. For what does everything mean here, if not “everything in reality? And that, for Carnap, is cognitively meaningless. Eli Hirsch (2002) is a neo-Carnapian proponent of the doctrine of quantifier variance, but he differs from Carnap in at least two respects (see also Putnam 1987). First, Hirsch applies the doctrine of quantifier variance not just to the quantifiers in artificial languages, as was Carnap's way, but to ordinary language quantifiers. Instead of Carnap's many linguistic frameworks, we have many possible languages including English and (Hirsch would say) the somewhat bizarre variations on English spoken by some contemporary metaphysicians. For example, Lewish, the language spoken by mereologists (and named after its defender, David Lewis) quantifies over arbitrary fusions, whereas English, Hirsch claims, does not. Second, Hirsch's brand of quantifier variance is meant to be compatible with realism, that there is a single reality in virtue of which our theories, with their various quantifiers, are made true or false. This reality cannot, in and of itself, be ontologically structured; it cannot have a metaphysically privileged division into objects, lest one quantifier be privileged over the others. Reality consists rather of unstructured facts that we carve up differently with our different quantifiers. Hirsch's realism contrasts sharply with Carnap's anti-realism. For Carnap, different linguistic frameworks are incommensurable. They peacefully coexist, logically isolated from one another. Apparent ontological disputes are meaningless for lack of a common subject matter, a single “reality” that is being disputed. For Hirsch, on the other hand, each side in an ontological dispute is speaking truly of the one and only reality. The appearance of a genuine dispute arises because they are speaking different languages whose quantifiers have different meanings. Each side of the dispute can translate the others claims into his own language to see that both are speaking truly, and that the dispute is merely verbal. The disagreement is over the meaning of words, not the nature of reality. This claim of intertranslatability is difficult to maintain (see Hawthorne 2009). But suppose it can be made good: what would that say about ontological commitment? Since theories that assert “there are Ks” and theories that assert “there are no Ks” need not conflict, one cannot simply look to the quantifiers for ontological commitment. Moreover, since no language, and no quantifier, is ontologically privileged, it would not help to first translate into a single language. We could relativize the notion of ontological commitment to languages; but given that reality itself, for Hirsch, isn't ontologically structured, none of these relativized notions of ontological commitment would be getting at something of ontological significance (including the one that gave ontological commitment relative to ordinary language, and ordinary language quantifiers). All theories, it appears, are ontologically committed to the single reality, and the unstructured facts that comprise it; but that commitment does not come from quantification. Where it comes from is not addressed.