 Thomas Nagel once wrote: The interesting problem of other minds is not the epistemological problem… It is the conceptual problem, how I can understand the attribution of mental states to others. (1986: 19-20) Bilgrami agrees (1992). Some philosophers go further than Nagel and insist that the conceptual is the fundamental problem; others see little in it (Hyslop 1995). How one understands this problem is a matter of some contention (Gomes 2011). What all agree is that the problem is associated with the work of Wittgenstein, and in particular section 302 from the Philosophical Investigations: If one has to imagine someone else’s pain on the model of one’s own, this is none too easy a thing to do: for I have to imagine pain which I do not feel on the model of pain which I do feel. That is, what I have to do is not simply to make a transition in imagination from one place of pain to another. As, from the pain in the hand to pain in the arm. For I am not to imagine that I feel pain in some region of his body…. Malcolm understands 302 as providing an “external attack” on the possibility of a private language (contrast the argument of  §1.1).  That is to say, 302 is designed to show the difficulty that one runs into if one begins with the idea that one knows from one’s own case what it is to feel pain: one risks conceptual solipsism.  [12]  Colin McGinn has suggested that the problem raised in 302 can be thought of in the following way: if I learn through introspection what it is, say, to be in pain, then there is a “a way of thinking about my experiences which (a) only I have and (b) enters into my understanding of the concept in question” (1984: 127). The way I learn about the object of my thought here is as something that has a “distinctively first-person element” from which it seems impossible to prescind (ibid). This explains why I can make a transition from the pain in my hand to the pain in my arm, but it is “none too easy a thing” to make a transition from a pain that I feel in my hand to a pain that you feel somewhere in your body (for a very different interpretation of the 302, see Kripke 1982, Postscript). Some associate the conceptual problem here with the problem of coming to have mental concepts that are completely general. Evans has proposed that to have a thought about an object to the effect that it is F (consider: Tom is angry) requires the exercise of the following two capacities: One being the capacity to think of x, which could be equally exercised in thoughts about x to the effect that it is G or H; and the other being a conception of what it is to be F, which could be equally exercised in thoughts about other individuals, to the effect that they are F. (1982: 75) Evans labels this the “generality constraint” (Ibid, ftnt. 15), and it has been thought to raise a problem for thoughts about mental states if one takes it that one comes to know what a mental state is by inward reflection alone. The problem, reflected in 302, is how to understand the extension to others of a concept acquired in this way. P.F. Strawson in effect acknowledges the generality constraint when he writes: It is a necessary condition of one’s ascribing states of consciousness, experiences, to oneself, in the way that one does, that one should also ascribe them, or be prepared to ascribe them, to others who are not oneself. (1959: 99) Strawson considers how it is that one ascribes mental states to others and concludes that one cannot do this if we insist on divorcing mental states from the behaving body. Strawson claims that we must acknowledge what he calls the “primitiveness of the concept of a person”, the concept of a type of entity such that both predicates ascribing states of consciousness and predicates ascribing corporeal characteristics…are equally applicable…. (1959: 101–2) While many will accept that the conceptual problem is the first problem we encounter in connection with others, others go further and claim that once one addresses the conceptual problem there is no room for the epistemological one. This is because our way of thinking and talking about mind will have application to others built into it from the start. It has been pointed out that to say what is required for grasp of a concept is not yet to show that that concept is  instantiated.[13]  It can be said in reply that it is a particular proposed solution to this conceptual problem that may be thought to make the epistemological question otiose. As we can see with Strawson’s proposal, the idea is that we break down the gap between mind and behavior and understand what one experiences when one sees another’s behavior as itself requiring mental state attributions to the other. Some can only see in this proposal a retreat into behaviorism. Others, however, insist that this is not the case—at least if behaviorism is understood as a reductionist thesis. It is not reductionist to hold that behavior is expressive of another’s mental life; genuinely expressive behavior is held to be distinguishable from ‘mere behavior’ (cf. Austin 1946). McDowell claims to echo Strawson’s work when he writes in this connection that we must regain the concept of a human being from what he takes to be a “philosophically generated” concept of a human body (McDowell 1982: 469; cf. Cook 1969). Some take issue with McDowell over whether the latter is only a philosophically generated concept (Wright 1998), but it is hard to deny that the move from the former concept to the latter is deeply significant.