 Benacerraf’s work motivated philosophers to develop both structuralist and nominalist theories in the philosophy of mathematics (Reck & Price 2000). And since the late 1980s, combinations of structuralism and nominalism have also been developed. As if saddling platonism with one difficult problem were not enough  (section 3.4),  Benacerraf formulated a challenge for set-theoretic platonism (Benacerraf 1965). The challenge takes the following form. There exist infinitely many ways of identifying the natural numbers with pure sets. Let us restrict, without essential loss of generality, our discussion to two such ways: The simple question that Benacerraf asks is: Which of these consists solely of true identity statements: I or II? It seems very difficult to answer this question. It is not hard to see how a successor function and addition and multiplication operations can be defined on the number-candidates of I and on the number-candidates of II so that all the arithmetical statements that we take to be true come out true. Indeed, if this is done in the natural way, then we arrive at isomorphic structures (in the set-theoretic sense of the word), and isomorphic structures make the same sentences true (they are elementarily equivalent). It is only when we ask extra-arithmetical questions, such as ‘\(1 \in 3\)?’ that the two accounts of the natural numbers yield diverging answers. So it is impossible that both accounts are correct. According to story I, \(3 = \{\{\{\varnothing \}\}\}\), whereas according to story II, \(3 = \{\varnothing , \{\varnothing \}, \{\varnothing , \{\varnothing \}\}\}\). If both accounts were correct, then the transitivity of identity would yield a purely set theoretic falsehood. Summing up, we arrive at the following situation. On the one hand, there appear to be no reasons why one account is superior to the other. On the other hand, the accounts cannot both be correct. This predicament is sometimes called labelled Benacerraf’s identification problem. The proper conclusion to draw from this conundrum appears to be that neither account I nor account II is correct. Since similar considerations would emerge from comparing other reasonable-looking attempts to reduce natural numbers to sets, it appears that natural numbers are not sets after all. It is clear, moreover, that a similar argument can be formulated for the rational numbers, the real numbers… Benacerraf concludes that they, too, are not sets at all. It is not at all clear whether Gödel, for instance, is committed to reducing the natural numbers to pure sets. A platonist can uphold the claim that the natural numbers can be embedded into the set-theoretic universe while maintaining that the embedding should not be seen as an ontological reduction. Indeed, on Linsky and Zalta’s plenitudinous platonist account, the natural numbers have no properties beyond those that are attributed to them by our theory of the natural numbers (Peano Arithmetic). But then it seems that platonists would have to take a similar line with respect to the rational numbers, the complex numbers, …. Whereas maintaining that the natural numbers are sui generis admittedly has some appeal, it is perhaps less natural to maintain that the complex numbers, for instance, are also sui generis. And, anyway, even if the natural numbers, the complex numbers, … are in some sense not reducible to anything else, one may wonder if there may not be another way to elucidate their nature. Shapiro draws a useful distinction between algebraic and non-algebraic mathematical theories (Shapiro 1997). Roughly, non-algebraic theories are theories which appear at first sight to be about a unique model: the intended model of the theory. We have seen examples of such theories: arithmetic, mathematical analysis… Algebraic theories, in contrast, do not carry a prima facie claim to be about a unique model. Examples are group theory, topology, graph theory… Benacerraf’s challenge can be mounted for the objects that non-algebraic theories appear to describe. But his challenge does not apply to algebraic theories. Algebraic theories are not interested in mathematical objects per se; they are interested in structural aspects of mathematical objects. This led Benacerraf to speculate whether the same could not be true also of non-algebraic theories. Perhaps the lesson to be drawn from Benacerraf’s identification problem is that even arithmetic does not describe specific mathematical objects, but instead only describes structural relations? Shapiro and Resnik hold that all mathematical theories, even non-algebraic ones, describe structures. This position is known as structuralism (Shapiro 1997; Resnik 1997). Structures consists of places that stand in structural relations to each other. Thus, derivatively, mathematical theories describe places or positions in structures. But they do not describe objects. The number three, for instance, will on this view not be an object but a place in the structure of the natural numbers. Systems are instantiations of structures. The systems that instantiate the structure that is described by a non-algebraic theory are isomorphic with each other, and thus, for the purposes of the theory, equally good. The systems I and II that were described in  section 4.1  can be seen as instantiations of the natural number structure. \(\{\{\{\varnothing \}\}\}\) and \(\{\varnothing , \{\varnothing \}, \{\varnothing , \{\varnothing \}\}\}\) are equally suitable for playing the role of the number three. But neither are the number three. For the number three is an open place in the natural number structure, and this open place does not have any internal structure. Systems typically contain structural properties over and above those that are relevant for the structures that they are taken to instantiate. Sensible identity questions are those that can be asked from within a structure. They are those questions that can be answered on the basis of structural aspects of the structure. Identity questions that go beyond a structure do not make sense. One can pose the question whether \(3 \in 4\), but not cogently: this question involves a category mistake. The question mixes two different structures: \(\in\) is a set-theoretical notion, whereas 3 and 4 are places in the structure of the natural numbers. This seems to constitute a satisfactory answer to Benacerraf’s challenge. In Shapiro’s view, structures are not ontologically dependent on the existence of systems that instantiate them. Even if there were no infinite systems to be found in Nature, the structure of the natural numbers would exist. Thus structures as Shapiro understands them are abstract, platonic entities. Shapiro’s brand of structuralism is often labeled ante rem structuralism. In textbooks on set theory we also find a notion of structure. Roughly, the set theoretic definition says that a structure is an ordered \(n+1\)-tuple consisting of a set, a number of relations on this set, and a number of distinguished elements of this set. But this cannot be the notion of structure that structuralism in the philosophy of mathematics has in mind. For the set theoretic notion of structure presupposes the concept of set, which, according to structuralism, should itself be explained in structural terms. Or, to put the point differently, a set-theoretical structure is merely a system that instantiates a structure that is ontologically prior to it. Nonetheless, the motivation for extending ante rem structuralism even to the most encompassing mathematical discipline (set theory) is not entirely evident (Burgess 2015). Recall that the main motivation for arriving at a structuralist understanding of a mathematical discipline lies in Benacerraf’s identification problem. For set theory, it seems hard to mount an identification challenge: sets are not usually defined in terms of more primitive concepts. It appears that ante rem structuralism describes the notion of a structure in a somewhat circular manner. A structure is described as places that stand in relation to each other, but a place cannot be described independently of the structure to which it belongs. Yet this is not necessarily a problem. For the ante rem structuralist, the notion of structure is a primitive concept, which cannot be defined in other more basic terms. At best, we can construct an axiomatic theory of mathematical structures. But Benacerraf’s epistemological problem still appears to be urgent. Structures and places in structures may not be objects, but they are abstract. So it is natural to wonder how we succeed in obtaining knowledge of them. This problem has been taken by certain philosophers as a reason for developing a nominalist theory of mathematics and then to reconcile this theory with basic tenets of structuralism. Goodman and Quine tried early on to bite the bullet: they embarked on a project to reformulate theories from natural science without making use of abstract entities (Goodman & Quine 1947). The nominalistic reconstruction of scientific theories proved to be a difficult task. Quine, for one, abandoned it after this initial attempt. In the past decades many theories have been proposed that purport to give a nominalistic reconstruction of mathematics. (Burgess & Rosen 1997) contains a good critical discussion of such views. In a nominalist reconstruction of mathematics, concrete entities will have to play the role that abstract entities play in platonistic accounts of mathematics, and concrete relations (such as the part-whole relation) have to be used to simulate mathematical relations between mathematical objects. But here problems arise. First, already Hilbert observed that, given the discretization of nature in quantum mechanics, the natural sciences may in the end claim that there are only finitely many concrete entities (Hilbert 1925). Yet it seems that we would need infinitely many of them to play the role of the natural numbers — never mind the real numbers. Where does the nominalist find the required collection of concrete entities? Secondly, even if the existence of infinitely many concrete objects is assumed, it is not clear that even elementary mathematical theories such as Primitive Recursive Arithmetic can be “simulated” by means of nominalistic relations (Niebergall 2000). Field made an earnest attempt to carry out a nominalistic reconstruction of Newtonian mechanics (Field 1980). The basic idea is this. Field wanted to use concrete surrogates of the real numbers and functions on them. He adopted a realist stance toward the spatial continuum, and took regions of space to be as physically real as chairs and tables. And he took regions of space to be concrete (after all, they are spatially located). If we also count the very disconnected ones, then there are as many regions of Newtonian space as there are subsets of the real numbers. And then there are enough concrete entities to play the role of the natural numbers, the real numbers, and functions on the real numbers. And the theory of the real numbers and functions on them is all that is needed to formulate Newtonian mechanics. Of course it would be even more interesting to have a nominalistic reconstruction of a truly contemporary scientific theory such as Quantum Mechanics. But given that the project can be carried out for Newtonian mechanics, some degree of initial optimism seems justified. This project clearly has its limitations. It may be possible nominalistically to interpret theories of function spaces on the real numbers, say. But it seems far-fetched to think that along Fieldian lines a nominalistic interpretation of set theory can be found. Nevertheless, if it is successful within its confines, then Field’s program has really achieved something. For it would mean that, to some extent at least, mathematical entities appear to be dispensable after all. He would thereby have taken an important step towards undermining the indispensability argument for Quinean modest platonism in mathematics, for, to some extent, mathematical entities appear to be dispensable after all. Field’s strategy only has a chance of working if Hilbert’s fear that in a very fundamental sense our best scientific theories may entail that there are only finitely many concrete entities, is ill-founded. If one sympathizes with Hilbert’s concern but does not believe in the existence of abstract entities, then one might bite the bullet and claim that there are only finitely many mathematical entities, thus contradicting the basic principles of elementary arithmetic. This leads to a position that has been called ultra-finitism (Essenin-Volpin 1961). On most accounts, ultra-finitism leads, like intuitionism, to revisionism in mathematics. For it would seem that one would then have to say that there is a largest natural number, for instance. From the outside, a theory postulating only a finite mathematical universe appears proof-theoretically weak, and therefore very likely to be consistent. But Woodin has developed an argument that purports to show that from the ultra-finitist perspective, there are no grounds for asserting that the ultra-finitist theory is likely to be consistent (Woodin 2011). Regardless of this argument (the details of which are not discussed here), many already find the assertion that there is a largest number hard to swallow. But Lavine has articulated a sophisticated form of set-theoretical ultra-finitism which is mathematically non-revisionist (Lavine 1994). He has developed a detailed account of how the principles of ZFC can be taken to be principles that describe determinately finite sets, if these are taken to include indefinitely large ones. Field’s physicalist interpretation of arithmetic and analysis not only undermines the Quine-Putnam indispensability argument. It also partially provides an answer to Benacerraf’s epistemological challenge. Admittedly it is not a simple task to give an account of how humans obtain knowledge of spacetime regions. But at least according to many (but not all) philosophers spacetime regions are physically real. So we are no longer required to explicate how flesh and blood mathematicians stand in contact with non-physical entities. But Benacerraf’s identification problem remains. One may wonder why one spacetime point or region rather than another plays the role of the number \(\pi\), for instance. In response to the identification problem, it seems attractive to combine a structuralist approach with Field’s nominalism. This leads to versions of nominalist structuralism, which can be outlined as follows. Let us focus on mathematical analysis. The nominalist structuralist denies that any concrete physical system is the unique intended interpretation of analysis. All concrete physical systems that satisfy the basic principles of Real Analysis (RA) would do equally well. So the content of a sentence \(\phi\) of the language of analysis is (roughly) given by: Every concrete system S that makes RA true, also makes \(\phi\) true. This entails that, as with ante rem structuralism, only structural aspects are relevant to the truth or falsehood of mathematical statements. But unlike ante rem structuralism, no abstract structure is postulated above and beyond concrete systems. According to in rebus structuralism, no abstract structures exist over and above the systems that instantiate them; structures exist only in the systems that instantiate them. For this reason nominalist in rebus structuralism is sometimes described as “structuralism without structures”. Nominalist structuralism is a form of in rebus structuralism. But in rebus structuralism is not exhausted by nominalist structuralism. Even the version of platonism that takes mathematics to be about structures in the set-theoretic sense of the word can be viewed as a form of in rebus structuralism. In mathematical discourse, non-algebraic structures (such as ‘the’ natural numbers) and mathematical objects (such as ‘the’ number 1) are referred to by definite descriptions. This strongly suggests that mathematical symbols (N, 1) have a unique reference rather than a ‘distributed’ one as in rebus structuralism would have it. But in rebus structuralists argue that such mathematical symbols function as dedicated variables in much the same way as in ‘Tommy needs his letters from home’, a world war II slogan, the name ‘Tommy’ is chosen to stand for some arbitrary concrete soldier, and re-used on many occasions without changing its reference (Pettigrew 2008). If Hilbert’s worry is wellfounded in the sense that there are no concrete physical systems that make the postulates of mathematical analysis true, then the above nominalist structuralist rendering of the content of a sentence \(\phi\) of the language of analysis gets the truth conditions of such sentences wrong. For then for every universally quantified sentence \(\phi\), its paraphrase will come out vacuously true. So an existential assumption to the effect that there exist concrete physical systems that can serve as a model for RA is needed to back up the above analysis of the content of mathematical statements. Perhaps something like Field’s construction fits the bill. Putnam noticed early on that if the above explication of the content of mathematical sentences is modified somewhat, a substantially weaker background assumption is sufficient to obtain the correct truth conditions (Putnam 1967). Putnam proposed the following modal rendering of the content of a sentence \(\phi\) of the language of analysis: Necessarily, every concrete system S that makes RA true, also makes \(\phi\) true. This is a stronger statement than the nonmodal rendering that was presented earlier. But it seems equally plausible. And an advantage of this rendering is that the following modal existential background assumption is sufficient to make the truth conditions of mathematical statements come out right: It is possible that there exists a concrete physical system that can serve as a model for RA. (‘It is possible that’ here means ‘It is or might have been the case that’.) Now Hilbert’s concern seems adequately addressed. For on Putnam’s account, the truth of mathematical sentences no longer depends on physical assumptions about the actual world. It is admittedly not easy to give a satisfying account of how we know that this modal existential assumption is fulfilled. But it may be hoped that the task is less daunting than the task of explaining how we succeed in knowing facts about abstract entities. And it should not be forgotten that the structuralist aspect of this (modal) nominalist position keeps Benacerraf’s identification challenge at bay. Putnam’s strategy also has its limitations. Chihara sought to apply Putnam’s strategy not only to arithmetic and analysis but also to set theory (Chihara 1973). Then a crude version of the relevant modal existential assumption becomes: It is possible that there exist concrete physical systems that can serve as a model for ZFC. Parsons has noted that when possible worlds are needed which contain collections of physical entities that have large transfinite cardinalities or perhaps are even too large to have a cardinal number, it becomes hard to see these as possible concrete or physical systems (Parsons 1990a). We seem to have no reason to believe that there could be physical worlds that contain highly transfinitely many entities. According to the previous proposals, the statements of ordinary mathematics are true when suitably, i.e., nominalistically, interpreted. The nominalistic account of mathematics that will now be discussed holds that all existential mathematical statements are false simply because there are no mathematical entities. (For the same reason all universal mathematical statements will be trivially true.) Fictionalism holds that mathematical theories are like fiction stories such as fairy tales and novels. Mathematical theories describe fictional entities, in the same way that literary fiction describes fictional characters. This position was first articulated in the introductory chapter of (Field 1989), and has in recent years been gaining in popularity. This crude description of the fictionalist position immediately opens up the question what sort of entities fictional entities are. This appears to be a deep metaphysical ontological problem. One way to avoid this question altogether is to deny that there exist fictional entities. Mathematical theories should be viewed as invitations to participate in games of pretence, in which we act as if certain mathematical entities exist. Pretence or make-believe operators shield their propositional objects from existential exportation (Leng 2010). Anyway, as said above, on the fictionalist view, a mathematical theory isn’t literally true. Nonetheless, mathematics is used to get truths across. So we must subtract something from what is literally said when we assert a physical theory that involves mathematics, if we want to get at the truth. But this requires a theory of how this subtraction of content works. Such a theory has been developed in (Yablo, 2014). If the fictionalist thesis is correct, then one demand that must be imposed on mathematical theories is surely consistency. Yet Field adds to this a second requirement: mathematics must be conservative over natural science. This means, roughly, that whenever a statement of an empirical theory can be derived using mathematics, it can in principle also be derived without using any mathematical theories. If this were not the case, then an indispensability argument could be played out against fictionalism. Whether mathematics is in fact conservative over physics, for instance, is currently a matter of controversy. Shapiro has formulated an incompleteness argument that intends to refute Field’s claim (Shapiro 1983). If there are indeed no mathematical (fictional) entities, as one form of fictionalism has it, then Benacerraf’s epistemological problem does not arise. Fictionalism then shares this advantage over most forms of platonism with nominalistic reconstructions of mathematics. But the appeal to pretence operators entails that the logical form of mathematical sentences then differs somewhat from their surface form. If there are fictional objects, then the surface form of mathematical sentences can be taken to coincide with their logical form. But if they exist as abstract entities, then Benacerraf’s epistemological problem reappears. Whether Benacerraf’s identification problem is solved is not completely clear. In general, fictionalism is a non-reductionist account. Whether an entity in one mathematical theory is identical with an entity that occurs in another theory is usually left indeterminate by mathematical “stories”. Yet Burgess has rightly emphasized that mathematics differs from literary fiction in the fact that fictional characters are usually confined to one work of fiction, whereas the same mathematical entities turn up in diverse mathematical theories (Burgess 2004). After all, entities with the same name (such as \(\pi)\) turn up in different theories. Perhaps the fictionalist can maintain that when mathematicians develop a new theory in which an “old” mathematical entity occurs, the entity in question is made more precise. More determinate properties are ascribed to it than before, and this is all right as long as overall consistency is maintained. The canonical objection to formalism seems also applicable to fictionalism. The fictionalists should find some explanation of the fact that extending a mathematical theory in one way, is often considered preferable over continuing it in a another way that is incompatible with the first. There is often at least an appearance that there is a right way to extend a mathematical theory.