 We have looked at the sufficiency objection and noted one way in which the supervenience approach might meet it.  But one might think that the problem goes deeper than has been brought out so far. According to this line of thought, what is lying behind the sufficiency objection is the fact that (1) is a modal definition of physicalism, i.e. one in terms of necessity and possibility.  But, the suggestion continues, modal definitions inevitably face problems of this sort.  If so, the proper response to the objection is to not to retain the basic shape of (1) and add to it in various ways, but to offer a quite different proposal, i.e. one that is a non-modal in character. What might this alternative be like? I think it is fair to say that this is a currently open question in the literature. So in this section, I aim only to review three leading candidates and to note some issues with each. The first non-modal definition has been explored in most detail by Andrew Melnyk (see Melnyk 2003 and the references therein). For Melnyk, a property F realizes a property G if and only if (a) G is identical to a second-order property, the property of having some property that has a certain causal or theoretical role; and (b) F is the property that plays the causal or theoretical role in question.  We may call this notion 'second-order realization' to distinguish it from a different notion of realization to be considered in a moment.)  This suggests: Suppose we call physicalism so defined second-order realization physicalism; what is the relation between it and supervenience physicalism? Supervenience physicalism does not entail second-order realization physicalism since the fact that a property F supervenes on a property G does not entail that F is a second-order property. Does second-order realization physicalism entail supervenience physicalism?  The usual assumption is that it does; and indeed it is natural to suppose that any proposed definition of physicalism would entail supervenience physicalism even if the reverse is not true (though see Montero 2013 for an argument to the contrary). However, as Melnyk himself notes at one point (2003, p. 23), there is an issue here having to do having to do with the definition of a second-order property, the property of having some property that has a certain causal or theoretical role. What are the properties involved in spelling out these causal or theoretical roles?  If physicalism is true at all, it must be true of these properties as much as any other properties.  But then by second-order realization physicalism, these properties themselves will be either physical or realized by physical properties. If the first option is taken, the second-order realization physicalist will stand revealed as holding a version of identity physicalism (one level up, as it were), and thus will face the multiple realization objection.  If the second option is taken, the second-order realization physicalist looks committed to an infinite regress, since now we have further properties realized by physical properties and, correlatively, further causal or theoretical roles. To avoid the regress, the realization physicalism might say that these properties supervene on physical properties. But now it hard to see the difference between the realization physicalist and the supervenient physicalist in the first place. The second non-modal definition of physicalism has been developed by Wilson 1999, 2011 and Shoemaker 2007. On this view, a property F realizes a property G if and only if (a) G has some set of causal powers or features S; (b) F has some set of causal powers or features S*; and (c) S is a sub-set of S*.  (We may call this notion 'sub-set realization' to distinguish it from the different notion of realization just considered.)  This suggests: Suppose we call physicalism so defined sub-set realization physicalism; what is the relation between it and supervenience physicalism? Supervenience physicalism does not entail sub-set realization physicalism since the fact that a property G supervenes on a property F does not entail anything about their causal powers.  For example, it may be that F has no causal powers at all, while G does; this might be the case if causation is a macro-phenomenon as some philosophers have held it to be. Does sub-set realization physicalism entail supervenience physicalism?  Well, there is a problem here too having to do with (what is sometimes called) a causal theory of properties, that is, a theory according to which the causal powers or features that a property bestows on the things that have it are exhaustive of the nature of that property.  Suppose that a causal theory is false. Then, in principle, one property might sub-set realize another and yet be quite different from it in nature. And this in turn suggests that sub-set realization physicalism does not by itself entail supervenience physicalism.  Of course, one might respond by asserting that the causal theory is true.  But to do that is controversial; indeed, even those philosophers who hold both a sub-set model and a causal theory want to separate out these two commitments (e.g. Shoemaker 2007; see also Wilson 2011). Alternatively, one might respond by denying that physicalism entails supervenience in the first place, by saying that "lack of...supervenience is compatible with physicalism" (Wilson 2014, 255, see also Wilson 2011). But this too is controversial; at any rate, the sufficiency objection by itself provides no reason for doubting that supervenience is necessary.  Hence the status of the sub-set model remains controversial. The third non-modal definition focuses on the idea of grounding, something that has been extensively discussed recently in the metaphysics literature (see, e.g., Fine 2001, Schaffer 2009, Rosen 2010, Wilson 2014 and the essays in Correia and Schneider 2012). Intuitively, a property F is grounded in a property G just in case F holds in virtue of G, or the instantiation of G explains the instantiation of F.  This suggests: Suppose we call physicalism so defined grounding physicalism; what is the relation between it and supervenience physicalism? Supervenience physicalism does not entail grounding physicalism, since the fact that a property F supervenes on a property G does not entail that F is grounded by G. Does grounding physicalism entail supervenience physicalism?  Some philosophers suppose it does (e.g. Rosen 2010) and so for them grounding physicalism would entail supervenience physicalism.  But others suppose it does not (e.g. Schaffer 2009) which raises the question of whether a thesis such as (14) by itself provides an account of physicalism, or whether some compromise between it and (1) would have to be reached. Even if grounding physicalism entails supervenience physicalism, however, there is the further problem that the notion itself is controversial.  Wilson (2014), for example, points out that grounding per se is similar to supervenience in that it leaves open many of the questions philosophers of mind are interested in, viz., whether the mental exists, whether it is reduced to the physical, and whether it is causally efficacious.  She concludes that grounding “cannot do the work” that its proponents want it to do (2014, 542). One might respond that this depends on what work grounding physicalism is supposed to do.  For example, if grounding physicalism, like supervenience physicalism, is intended only to capture minimal physicalism, in the sense described above (see Supervenience Physicalism as Minimal Physicalism)  it may be no objection that it fails to answer these questions. Whatever is the truth about this, however, there is no doubt that the precise contours of the grounding relation are yet to be made out. Hence, the proper assessment of grounding physicalism is at this point unclear.