 After 1905, we see in Russell a parsimonious inclination. He wants to eliminate entities from his ontology. Some time between 1908 and 1910 he begins to deny the existence of propositions and this denial continues until he develops a theory of propositions as structures of images or words in (1918). What, then, is the fate of propositional functions? It might seem difficult to understand what a propositional function is without the existence of propositions, but Russell's view is, not that complicated.  Russell only rejects false propositions. He retains facts in his ontology. Propositional functions, in Principia, are what we now call ‘partial functions’. That is to say, they do not always have values. For example, the propositional function __ is a dog does not have a value for the Sydney Opera House taken as an argument, but it does have a value when my dog is taken as its argument. So, the rejection of false propositions does not cause a serious problem for the theory of propositional functions in Russell. Having dealt with that problem, let us go on to see what Whitehead and Russell think the nature of propositional functions is. In Principia, they say: By a ‘propositional function’ we mean something which contains a variable x, and expresses a proposition as soon as a value is assigned to x. That is to say, it differs from a proposition solely by the fact that it is ambiguous: it contains a variable of which the value is unassigned. (1910, 38). In this passage, it seems as though they are saying that a propositional function is an ambiguous proposition. In light of the rejection of propositions, this view is especially hard to understand. Urquhart (2003) says that for Whitehead and Russell, a propositional function is something rather like a formula. This seems right, since propositional functions contain variables. But what exactly are propositional functions in Principia? This is a matter of heated debate among Russell scholars. Perhaps the most influential interpretation is the constructive interpretation, due to Kurt Gödel (1944). On this interpretation, propositional functions are human constructs of some sort. They depend on our ability to think about them or refer to them. A version of the constructive interpretation can also be found in Linsky (1999). There is also a more nominalist interpretation in Landini (1998). On the realist side, are the interpretations given by Alonzo Church (1984) and Warren Goldfarb (1989). Goldfarb thinks that the logical theory of Principia is motivated by Russell's attempt to find the real nature of propositional functions and that this nature is independent of our thinking about it. Goldfarb has a good point, since Russell's logic is supposed to be a perspicuous representation of the way things are. But Russell often seems to deny that propositional functions are real entities.