 All of the accounts considered above – both Frege’s account, the neo-Fregean accounts, and the various versions of neo-Russellianism, from Naive Russellianism to Crimmins and Perry’s view and Richard’s view – share a common assumption of structured-propositionalism, according to which the objects of thought are propositions, which are public, language-independent, abstract entities with a structure that mirrors, to some degree, the syntactic structure of the natural language sentences that express them. This assumption is very widely, although not universally, made by contemporary philosophers of language and mind. But many have found propositionalism problematic. There are a host of problems that have been raised, some ontological, some purely semantic. For example, some have found propositions to be unduly mysterious objects, having no place in a naturalistic world. Sometimes this is part of a general rejection of abstract entities and other times a rejection of intensional entities in particular. Others have found propositions to lack acceptable individuation conditions. And others have been moved by the so-called unity problem that ultimately led Russell to abandon propositions as the contents of the attitudes in favor of his multiple judgment theory. Finally, some have thought that the propositionalist assumption stands in the way of an acceptable solution to Frege’s puzzle. In this section we survey accounts that deny structured-propositionalism. There are two broad categories of such theories: The first denies propositionalism, according to which propositions are the objects of the attitudes. The most natural, although not the only, way to deny propositionalism is to embrace some form of sententialism, according to which belief attributions relate a person to some kind of linguistic entity. The second accepts a commitment to the propositionalist’s claim that the objects of thought are public, language-independent, abstract entities, but denies that these entities are structured. The most natural, although, again, not the only, way to deny structure is to identify sets of possible worlds, or functions from worlds to truth values, with the objects of thought. We shall consider sententialism and the denial of structure in turn. First sententialism. The simplest form of sententialism, roughly inspired by Rudolph Carnap’s analysis of belief sentences, claims that what we have been calling “propositional attitudes” are really attitudes towards sentences. (See, for example, Carnap 1947 [1958]. Quine too was a proponent of this view. See, for example, his 1956.) On this view, (1) is analyzed as (15), where ‘believes-true’ expresses a primitive relation between an agent and a sentence. (Similar relations will have to be introduced to correspond to ‘hopes-true’, ‘desires-true’, etc..) This proposal obviously won’t do. As Church famously pointed out (see Church 1943, p. 45), construing propositional attitude verbs as relating agents to sentences seems to require that the agent in question understands the language used in the report. Suppose that Lois is a monolingual German speaker, but that everything else about the Superman stories is the same. Then we’d still be inclined to count (1) as true. But (15), which is proposed to analyze (1), is obviously false, as Lois bears no relation whatsoever to the English sentence ‘Superman is strong’. Proponents of sententialism are well aware of the problem. But it is much less obvious that they have succeeded in solving it. Carnap (see Carnap 1947 [1958], supplement C) responds to Church’s objection by claiming that the proposal need not require that the agent believe-true the very sentence contained in the complement clause, but only some sentence or other that bears some relation (Carnap calls it ‘B’) to the sentence the ascriber uses. But this relation can’t simply be left unanalyzed. And one cannot analyze it in terms of believing-true a sentence that expressing the same proposition or worse still believing the proposition expressed by the embedded sentence, on pains of reverting to the thesis of propositionalism that the theory was designed to avoid. It seems plausible that some non-language-using animals have propositional attitudes or at least that some attitude ascribing sentences about non-language-using animals are true. For example, it seems that the dog wants to go out when she scratches at the door and that the cat believes food is on its way when she hears the can being opened and comes rushing in to eat. But it seems implausible to analyze these cases in terms of these creatures being related to sentences, as nonhuman animals almost certainly do not believe true sentences. Quine famously responded to this problem by writing: “We may treat a mouse’s fear of a cat as his fearing true a certain English sentence. This is unnatural without being therefore wrong. It is a little like describing a prehistoric ocean current as clockwise” (1956, p. 186). Although an excellent turn of the pen, it seems clear that the worry is in no way answered. Ascribing a clockwise current to a prehistoric ocean does not require the existence of clocks in prehistoric time, any more than our using actual resources to describe a counterfactual circumstance in which, say, there are no words requires that there are words in that counterfactual circumstance. But this is a false comparison to the case of treating a mouse’s fear of a cat as fearing true an English sentence when one is certain the mouse doesn’t understand English. In the case of non-language-using animals we aren’t using features of context to fix a content that we then evaluate at contexts without those features, as we are in the kinds of cases Quine draws our attention to. It is still hard to see how a mouse can fear- or believe-true any sentences, English or otherwise, even though it can fear a cat and believe that it is dangerous. Donald Davidson 1968 proposed a more complex version of sententialism. Although his account was first proposed as an account of indirect discourse (i.e., of sentences like ‘Bill said that the proposition won’t pass’), it has been extended to a general theory of propositional attitudes. (Davidson himself hinted at such in extension in the opening paragraph of his original paper.) We begin with indirect speech reports. Roughly, Davidson claims that a sentence like (16) has as its true logical form (17) below. (17) Galileo said that. The earth moves. Davidson’s idea is that ‘that’ in (16) functions as a demonstrative that refers to the utterance of the sentence that follows. So an utterance of (16) is really an utterance of two sentences, one with a demonstrative that then refers to the utterance that follows. Galileo need not have uttered the exact sentence demonstratively referred to for an utterance of (16) to be true. Instead, he must have uttered a sentence that “samesays” the utterance demonstratively referred to. So the account may seem to hold the promise of overcoming Church’s translation argument. This is called the paratactic account of indirect speech reports. Extending the paratactic account of indirect speech reports to propositional attitude reports more generally may seem straightforward. (1) is claimed to have the logical form of (18) below. An utterance of (1) is then seen to assert of Lois that she has a belief whose content is captured by the ascriber’s utterance of the sentence ‘Superman is strong’. The truth of (1) plus the true identity statement ‘Superman is Clark Kent’ is compatible with (4)’s falsity. This is because (18) plus the true identity statement does not entail (19) below. The two occurrences of ‘that’ in (18) and (19) do not refer to the same utterance and so there is no guarantee that the two utterances samesay the same things. So, the account respects the intuitive truth-value judgments of (1)-(4). The paratactic account, both solely as an account of indirect speech reports and as an account of propositional attitude reports more generally, has been subject to a wide range of criticisms. (For a sampling, see Bigelow 1980, Blackburn 1975, Burge 1986, Clapp 2002, McFetridge 1980, Rumfitt 1993, and especially Schiffer 1987b, pp. 122–38. See Lepore and Loewer 1989 for a defense.) First, there are languages where the apparent complementizer – ‘that’, in English – is not homophonic with a demonstrative. How deep this problem is depends on how seriously the paratactic account is about taking surface syntactic form as some kind of guide. One might claim that ‘believes’ (and its fellows) express a two place relation between an agent and some kind of utterance-like entity, where the embedded sentence functions as a representer of the utterance-like entity that the agent in question bears the relation to. There is no need, at least not without other assumptions, that the apparent complementizer itself function as a demonstrative. And even if there is a need for the complementizer itself to function as a demonstrative, there is no need for it to be a demonstrative. Second, and we think far more telling, there are entailment relations that are intuitively valid that the account counts as invalid and for precisely the same reasons that it counts invalid the intuitively offending entailments involved in Frege cases. Recall how the account invalidates substitution of co-referring names within the scope of ‘believes’ sketched above. The same kind of reasoning will, it seems, also lead one to think that the following is invalid. So, (B) Lois believes that. Superman is strong. Just as the two occurrences of ‘that’ in (15) and (16) refer to different utterances, so too the different occurrences of ‘that’ in (A) and (B) refer to different utterances. But something has evidently gone wrong if (A) does not entail (B). (This argument mirrors Kaplan’s argument the claim that the primary bearers of semantic contents are sentences-in-context, as opposed to utterances, which are concrete events. See Kaplan 1977.) This problem can be avoided if, following Rumfitt 1993, utterance-types as opposed to utterance-tokens are seen to be the referent of ‘that’. But there are other entailment relations that are also problematic for the paratactic account and are not avoided by Rumfitt’s move. (Similar points are made by Burge 1986 and Schiffer 1987b.) Intuitively, (1) entails (20). And consider the following entailment relations. and All of these are invalid if they are analyzed according to the paratactic analysis, whereas they are intuitively valid. This is strong evidence against the paratactic analysis, especially as that account is designed to respect our intuitive validity judgments. Lepore and Loewer 1989 respond to these entailment problems. They try to deal with all but the last, which concerns the relationship between so-called de dicto belief and de re belief (see the supplementary document, The De Re/De Dicto Distinction, op. cit.), by showing how the validity of the entailment is preserved by the addition of a premise that it is plausible to say we simply take for granted in assessing the validity of the entailments displayed above. The success of their strategy depends on the plausibility of the original entailment intuitions turning on our implicitly assuming the additional premise in question. There is a final problem that faces the paratactic account that we shall briefly discuss. (See Schiffer 1987b.) The key idea behind the paratactic view is that the utterance of the embedded sentence serves as a surrogate for some entity that the report then asserts the subject of the report bears some relation of samesaying to. But this is problematic for at least two reasons. First, the proponent of the paratactic account owes an account of when two utterances samesay one another. And, as was the case with Carnap’s proposal, this account cannot make appeal to a proposition which both utterances bear some relation to in virtue of which they samesay one another, on pains of the view collapsing into a version of a propositionalist view. Davidson thought he had such an account by treating a Tarskian theory of truth as a theory of meaning. (See his 1967.) Although there is no question of doing the issue justice here, Davidson’s work proposed that the primary aim of a theory of meaning is to explain speaker competence and in particular the knowledge by which speakers can understand a potentially infinite number of sentences. He thought that a Tarskian truth theory did just that. Although there are still practitioners of Davidsonian semantics, the view has been the subject of criticism. (Foster 1976 is the ultimate source of many of these criticisms. See Soames 1989, 1992 and chapter 12 of his 2003 for a further critique of the view. For a defense of the strategy, see Larson and Segal 1995.) This problem is more pressing when one moves from indirect speech reports to other propositional attitude reports. For, as Schiffer 1987b has stressed, whereas (16)’s truth plausibly requires the existence of an utterance on Galileo’s part, it is implausible to insist that the truth of (1) requires an actual utterance on Lois’s part. Lois might truly be said to believe that Superman is strong even though she has produced no utterances that samesay the ascriber’s utterance of ‘Superman is strong’. So, let ‘u′’ name the ascriber’s utterance of ‘The earth moves’. If (16) is true, then there exists an utterance u such that Galileo produced u and u′ and u samesay one another. Now let ‘u″’ name the attributer’s utterance of ‘Superman is strong’. The truth of (1) does not entail that there exists an utterance u such that Lois produced u and u″ and u samesay one another. So, even if one can give an adequate account of when two utterances samesay one another without presupposing a common meaning or proposition they are both related to, one’s work in defending the paratactic account as an account of belief sentences (and other propositional attitude reporting sentences) is not complete. The natural move to make in response is to try to find another token state – a belief state, for example – whose existence is guaranteed by the truth of a sentence like (1) which can then be thought to enter into the samesaying relation to u′. This is what Lepore and Loewer 1989 suggest. But problems remain. First, even if some beliefs involve an actual episode in the believer’s mind, say the tokening of some brain state that can be said to samesay u, there are other beliefs, implicit beliefs, for which it is implausible to insist that they are had because of the actual existence of a token state that is capable of entering into the samesaying relation to an utterance. You most likely did not believe 5 minutes ago that there was a pink elephant in your room. The view easily accommodates this fact, as it is not the case that you were in some brain state that samesays my utterance of the sentence ‘There is an elephant in your room’. But, precisely for the same reason, the view seems to not accommodate the fact that you also believed that there was not an elephant in your room. (After all, you weren’t merely agnostic on the matter, having an unsettled mind as to whether or not there is an elephant before you.) At least prior to your reading these sentences, it seems implausible that you were in some token belief state that samesays an utterance of ‘There is not a pink elephant in your room’. So, implicit beliefs still seem to be a problem for this account. Second, the view seems saddled with the same problem facing Carnap’s and Davidson’s views. It is well and fine to say that a propositional attitude report involves an utterance of an embedded sentence which samesays something that that the subject of the report bears the appropriate relation to. But the proponent of the paratactic account owes an analysis of the samesaying relation that doesn’t presuppose the notion of the two tokens having a common content, on pains of the view collapsing into a propositionalist view. Even if one remains optimistic that a Tarskian truth theory, properly constrained, will serve the purpose as an analysis of the meaning of utterances and then sentences, it is far from clear that one should be at all hopeful that a similar theory will serve the purpose of analyzing the content of belief, desire, and other attitude states. But then it is hard to see how the view could properly explicate the notion of samesaying without relying on the idea that utterances and belief states express, in some sense, propositions. And simply taking samesaying as a primitive is to merely pretend to have eliminated propositions from one’s theory. There is an alternative account, in the spirit of the simple sentential accounts, first suggested by Gilbert Harman in his 1972. On this view, the contents of the attitudes should be seen to be interpreted logical forms (ILFs). The idea has been worked out in more detail by Higginbotham 1991 and especially by Larson and Ludlow 1993. The idea is that propositional attitude verbs express relations between agents and ILFs, where an ILF is a syntactic tree structured with each of its nodes “interpreted,” or assigned semantic values. Take a simple example. (21) is the ILF associated with (5). (We assume, for simplicity, that the semantic value of a predicate is the set of individuals that it applies to.) Even though the semantic values of all the nodes of tree structures associated with (5) and (6) are the same, their ILFs differ given the different linguistic items ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’. The account thus views the contents of propositional attitudes as hybrids of linguistic and non-linguistic items; i.e., the expressions of the complement clauses and those expressions’s semantic values. And it promises to account for the intuitive truth of (1)-(4) by distinguishing the proposition that Superman is strong from the proposition that Clark Kent is strong in virtue of the difference in linguistic items. Clapp 2002 argues that Larson and Ludlow’s account violates Davidson’s constraint that the truth condition of a sentence is a function of the values of its constituent syntactic units and thus, Clapp argues, the account as a whole fails to provide an account of our semantic competence. Soames makes a similar point in his 2002, pp. 150–2, where he argues that Larson and Ludlow’s account fails when viewed as a part of the Davidsonian project of accounting for the meanings of sentences, and thus accounting for what speakers know in virtue of which they can understand arbitrary sentences with which they are competent, in terms of offering a Tarskian truth theory for the language. There are problems facing the account that are independent of its fitting in with the Davidsonian project. For example, Soames argues that the very mechanisms by which Larson and Ludlow account for the consistency of (1) and (3) – namely, by distinguishing the proposition that Superman is strong from the proposition that Clark Kent is strong on the grounds that the linguistic item ‘Superman’ is distinct from the linguistic item ‘Clark Kent’ – proves problematic for other cases in which we are inclined to think that differences in the linguistic items in the complement clauses cannot lead to a difference in truth-value. One example is an application of Church’s translation argument. If (1) is true, then a faithful translation of (1) into Spanish should preserve truth, leaving the names untranslated. The ILF associated with ‘Superman es fuerte’ is different from the ILF associated with (5), just as the ILF associated with (5) is different from the ILF associated with (6). If the core of the explanation of why (1) and (3) are consistent and, more generally, why substitution fails in the case of co-referring proper names, is that the substitution alters the ILF associated with the complement clause, then it would seem that the above translation, for the very same reason, should not be guaranteed to preserve truth. But it intuitively does. Larson and Ludlow are aware of this problem, considering it in §7 of their paper. They suggest two strategies. First they suggest altering the account so that the truth of (1) does guarantee the truth of (22). This is well and good, but it has to be done in such a way that we don’t lose our explanation of why (1) and (3) are consistent and why (1) doesn’t entail (4). Larson and Ludlow do not tell us how to thread that needle. Second, they consider admitting that (1) does not entail (22) and seeking to explain why (1) and (22) can nonetheless be used to report the same attitude by an auxiliary account. Again, this is well and good, but then they owe us an explanation of why we must go to such pains to explain one set of entailment intuitions semantically – namely, the intuition that (1) is consistent with (3) and so does not entail (4) – while being so cavalier about relegating other, equally (if not even more) robust entailment intuitions to a non-semantic theory. The availability of contextualist theories described above, and in particular Richard’s theory, which at least promises to respect both sets of entailment relations – that is, respect our intuitions of entailment failures, as in the Frege-style cases, as well as our intuitions about entailment successes, as in the relation between (1) and (22) – makes this second strategy all the more questionable. Fiengo and May 1996 argue that ILF accounts lack an adequate explanation of Kripke’s Paderewski puzzle. (See  Section 8  below.) In brief, Kripke’s puzzle involves pairs of sentences that, like (1) and (3), are intuitively consistent. Unlike (1) and (3), however, there do not appear to be different linguistic forms employed in the complement clauses. Instead, extra-linguistic contextual changes are employed in such a way that the same linguistic forms seem to indicate different states of the agent. If there is no difference in linguistic items, then the ILFs are the same and so the explanation Larson and Ludlow offer for why (1) and (3) are consistent cannot be carried over to Kripke’s case. This is problematic, as one would like a uniform explanation of the cases. Ludlow 2000 offers a response, although it seems to us that he moves drastically away from the key idea of the initial proposal, in which the LFs are public language entities. The assumption of structured propositionalism has two components: The claim that the objects of the attitudes are propositions and the view that those items are structured. So far we have discussed various ways of denying the first. We shall now turn to a discussion of views that deny the second. Hintikka 1969, Stalnaker 1984, and Lewis 1986 are the foremost proponents of unstructured-propositionalism. (See the entry on  structured propositions  for further details.) Briefly, the idea is that propositions are sets of possible worlds. The proposition that Bush is president, for example, just is the set of all possible worlds in which Bush instantiates the property being president. (Or, to remain neutral on issues of the metaphysics of transworld identity, all the worlds in which Bush or a counterpart of Bush instantiates that property.) There is no denying that a proposition determines a set of possible worlds – namely, the worlds at which the proposition is true. And for a good many semantic purposes – in particular, for giving the truth-conditions of sentences containing only extensional operators – treating propositions as sets of worlds suffices. But there are well known problems with this account when it comes to propositional attitudes. The most famous problem is the problem of equivalence. Intuitively, the proposition that arithmetic is incomplete is distinct from the proposition that 2+2=4. Most 5-year-olds know the latter but can’t even entertain the former. As both propositions are true in exactly the same set of worlds – namely, all, assuming the necessity of mathematical truths – unstructured-propositionalism entails that they are the same proposition. Indeed, unstructured propositionalism entails that there is exactly one necessary proposition. This is problematic, as it seems to entail that anyone believes that 2+2=4 just in case he believes that arithmetic is incomplete. The view also seems to have all of the problems that face the neo-Russellianism. Because Superman is Clark Kent, and assuming that identity is necessary, the set of worlds in which Superman is strong is exactly the set of worlds in which Clark Kent is strong. But then (5) and (6) express the same proposition. But, as the Frege case shows, there is a strong intuition, and a pair of powerful arguments to back it up, that an agent can believe the one without believing the other. Proponents of unstructured-propositionalism are well aware of these problems. Stalnaker 1984, 1987, and 1988 contain extremely ingenious attempts to solve them. Whereas proponents of possible world semantics see the contents of the attitudes being possible worlds, or functions from possible worlds to truth values, proponents of situation semantics, developed by Barwise and Perry 1983, see the contents of the attitudes being portions of possible worlds, situations. Situations are more fine-grained than possible worlds and so avoid some of the problems discussed above. But, as Soames shows in his 1985, the account inherits many of the problems. We shall here discuss just one. Recall that one of the problems facing Naive Russellianism was that seems to entail which in turn threatens to entail Because the situation that Superman is stronger than Clark Kent just is the situation that Superman is stronger than himself, insofar as situations are the contents of beliefs, these seem to be the same belief. The situation semanticist cannot appeal to the difference between the property of being taller than Superman and the property being taller than oneself, claiming that the first is a two-place relation and the second a monadic property, as the neo-Russellian can, to distinguish the propositions. This is because a difference in structure doesn’t correspond, for the situation semanticist, to a difference in proposition. But then the situation semanticists, as opposed to the Naive Russellian, is committed to the claim that Lois believes that Superman is stronger than himself. But surely that is irrational! (For more discussion of the problem, see Fine 2007, 2014, Pickel 205, Pickel and Rabern 2017, Pinillos 2011, and Salmon 2012, 2015 We don’t claim to have established the assumption of structured propositionalism. But the problems facing the alternatives do seem daunting enough to make that assumption a good bet.