 Anti-Fregeans draw their inspiration from  Bertrand Russell.  Russell proposed what we might call an acquaintance-based theory of thought, according to which some of our thoughts are directly about the individuals they concern. We follow Kaplan 1977 in calling such propositions singular propositions. A proposition is singular with respect to an object o just in case it is about o in virtue of having o as a direct constituent. It is general with respect to o, on the other hand, just in case it concerns o but only in virtue of having a proxy of o that determines, either by satisfaction conditions or otherwise, o. Russell maintained that there are logically proper names, which contribute only their referents to the propositions expressed by sentences that contain them in subject position. He thus maintained that sentences containing logically proper names express singular propositions. But Russell was stingy in what he counted as a genuine logically proper name. For Russell, only ‘this’, as a name of a sense datum, and perhaps ‘I’, when Russell set aside his Humean doubts with one’s acquaintance with a self, are genuine names. Ordinary external world objects cannot be named and are known only by description, according to Russell. This is because one can have a genuine name only for that with which one is acquainted and one is acquainted only with that for which misidentification is not rationally open and the individual’s existence is certain. So, if one is presented with an individual and it is possible to be presented with that individual again and not realize it is the same object as before, then one is not acquainted with that individual; one’s thoughts about that individual are, in that case, all indirect. This line of reasoning relies on the Fregean claim that cases of identity confusion must be explained in terms of a difference in thought-constituents. This led Russell to agree with Frege regarding the truth-values of (1)-(4) and agree that (5) and (6) express different propositions. But Russell still insisted that such thought is ultimately grounded in acquaintance with individuals, albeit not extra-mental individuals distinct from the self. Frege, on the other hand, maintained that all thought was indirect, in the sense that a thought is about an object o not in virtue of having o as a direct constituent but rather by having a surrogate as a direct constituent that then determined o, most plausibly in virtue of satisfaction conditions. Let’s consider an example to better appreciate Russell’s views about our thoughts about external reality. Suppose that you are sitting before an object and say to yourself, “That apple is green.” You are acquainted, Russell thinks, with the universal GREEN. But you are not acquainted with the apple itself, as misidentification is possible. Your thought about the apple is therefore by thought by description. But the description is not, for Russell, purely qualitative. Indeed, the description is individual-involving. In virtue of your visual experience of the apple, you are acquainted with a sense-datum caused by the apple. Call this sense-datum BILL; Russell would use the demonstrative ‘that’, pointing inward at your occurrent sense-datum. The content of your thought about the apple, according to Russell, is then something like the following. This proposition is general and thus indirect with respect to the external object (in this case, the apple), but singular and thus direct with respect to the sense-datum being demonstratively referred to. For Russell, this is the canonical form all thought about external reality takes. Thought about concrete particulars is ultimately grounded in acquaintance, albeit acquaintance with sense data, and descriptive. (For a very intuitive presentation of this view, see chapter 5 of Russell 1912. For a more detailed presentation, see Russell 1910.) It is clear that this is Russell’s view for the contents of thought. It is less clear, however, that Russell was a descriptivist about the semantics of ordinary proper names in public language. Indeed, there is good evidence that Russell thought that ordinary public language names have as their sole semantic value their referents and hence that simple sentences containing them express singular propositions, but that most of us at least cannot entertain those propositions and can only think about them under descriptions. (For a very nice defense of this asymmetric interpretation of Russell, see Sainsbury 1993.) More recent Russellians have, following Russell, maintained the objects of our thought are, in many cases, singular propositions. But they have broken from Russell in maintaining that extra-mental individuals – like your apple – can also be constituents of the thoughts we grasp. Let’s call such theorists neo-Russellians. (See Donnellan 1990 for a nice discussion of Russell’s view in contrast with what we are here calling neo-Russellians.) Neo-Russellianism is a standard, although by no means universal, view in contemporary philosophy of language and mind. There are important differences among neo-Russellians concerning what extra-mental objects can be thought of directly and, more importantly, which relations (perceptual, communicative, etc.) ground and are necessary for direct thought. (For a discussion of this issue, see Jeshion 2002, 2004 and the papers collected in Jeshion 2010. See also Crane 2011, 2013, especially chapter 6, Hawthorne and Manley 2012, Martin 2002, Recanti 2012, 2016. See also the supplementary document on for further discussion.) All neo-Russellians deny the Fregean idea that all cases of misidentification are to be explained in terms of a difference in thought. Unlike Russell himself, neo-Russellians maintain that singular thought is possible even for entities for which misidentification is possible. The neo-Russellian cannot appeal to a difference in thought contents to explain cases of rational misidentification, as the distinctive claim of the neo-Russellian is that the thought contents are the same precisely because the object misidentified is the same and the object exhausts the thought content. Neo-Russellians thus need to develop a new explanation of Frege’s puzzle. Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of neo-Russellians. The first – what we will call Naive Russellians – insist that the fundamental truth-conditions for belief attributions involve only the objects and properties, not the way those items are represented. According to Naive Russellians, we are wrong to think that (1) (i.e., ‘Lois believes that Superman is strong’) is true and (4) (i.e., ‘Lois believes that Clark Kent is strong’) is false. They are composed in the same way from elements with the same semantic contents. Proponents of this view include Bealer 1982, §39; Berg 1983; Braun 1998, 2000, 2001a/b; McKay 1981, 1991; Nelson 2002, 2005; Reddam 1982; Richard 1983, 1987; Salmon 1986, 1989, 1995a; Soames 1987, 1989, 1995; and Tye 1978, for example. (Bealer has changed his view; see his 1993. Richard has also changed his view in 1989 and has subsequently become one of the most effective critics of Naive Russellianism. We discuss Richard’s later view below in  Section 6.  Tye seems to have abandoned Naive Russellianism. Soames has also altered his view, although much less drastically than the other three, in his 2002.) The other version of neo-Russellianism, to be discussed below in  Section 6,  agrees with the Fregean about the truth-values of (1) and (4) but rejects the Fregean claim that this difference requires a difference in thought content. While (1) is true and (4) is false, proponents of this version of the view accept, that is not because they report attitudinal relations to different propositions; the proposition that Superman is strong just is, as all neo-Russellians insist, the proposition that Clark Kent is strong. Many Naive Russellians (Bealer, Berg, McKay, Nelson, Reddam, Richard, Salmon, Soames, and Tye, for example) attempt to explain why people wrongly judge that (1) is true and (4) is false by appeal to the different pragmatic implicatures utterances of those sentences typically generate. Other Naive Russellians (Braun) do not. We shall discuss both versions of Naive Russellianism in what follows. In communicating with one another, we have responsibilities that go beyond just avoiding falsehood. For example, it is true but inappropriate to utter the sentence ‘John is sober today’ if one knows that John is always sober. Uttering that sentence is misleading because it suggests a contrast where there is none. But that doesn’t make it false. Someone who claims that the sentence is false is confounding pragmatics with semantics. What the sentence says, as used on that occasion, is true, but uttering the sentence pragmatically implicates something false: Namely, that John is at least sometimes drunk. According to proponents of the first version of Naive Russellianism, confounding pragmatic responsibilities with our responsibility to avoid falsehood can lead people astray concerning the fundamental semantics of belief attribution. There are often responsibilities for indicating the way in which the believer represents the individuals that her beliefs are about, but these go beyond the truth-conditions of the attributions. Any additional responsibilities are pragmatic, not semantic, requirements on the speaker. They may be conditions that a speaker must ordinarily fulfill when making a belief attribution. But these conditions stem not from the information semantically encoded by a given utterance of a propositional attitude reporting sentence but instead from the information pragmatically implicated by those utterances. The Naive Russellian says that (4) is true (given that (1) is true and (1) and (4) say the same thing). But an utterance of (4) may nonetheless be very misleading and impart something false. Although Lois believes that Clark Kent is strong, she would not accept the sentence ‘Clark Kent is strong’. According to the pragmatic explanation of why people wrongly intuit that (4) is false, it is based on a confusion of semantics with pragmatics, as a typical utterance of (4) does pragmatically implicate something false. On this view, then, (4) is a true but misleading report of a belief Lois does indeed have. Let’s call this the standard Naive Russellian view. We can make this proposal more precise by articulating a metaphysics of belief encapsulated in John Perry’s distinction between what an agent believes and how she believes it. (See Perry 1977 for an early presentation of the distinction, where he characterized the distinction as one between thoughts and senses, and his 1979, where he characterized the distinction as one between belief contents and belief states, 1980, 1990, 1997, and 1998 for a fuller presentation. It should be noted that Perry himself is not a Naive Russellian, although he is a neo-Russellian. In his early papers, he simply left it undetermined whether or not sentences like (4) and (1) say the same thing, although Stalnaker claims that Perry claimed in personal communication that he intended his proposal to be equivalent to the Naive Russellian proposal; see note 11 of Stalnaker 1981. In later work, in particular his 1989, co-authored with Crimmins, Perry explicitly says that (1) and (4) have different truth values. We discuss Crimmins and Perry’s later view below in  Section 6.)  Perry argued against Frege’s solution to Frege’s puzzle by considering indexicals in propositional attitude reporting sentences. His attack is based upon the Fregean’s identification of belief contents with belief states. Perry argued that we can adequately account for indexicals in attitudes only when we distinguish these two aspect of acts of thinking and recognize that they can vary independently. Perry claimed that what one believes is a function of the belief states and environment one is in. We can believe different contents in different environments by being in the same belief state and we can believe the same content in different environments by being in the different belief states. So, for example, you and I are in the same belief states when we utter ‘I am hungry’ and yet, because of differences in our environments – namely, because I am me and you are you – our belief contents would be different. These differences in environment do not need to be conceptualized by the agent to make a difference to her cognitive states. You can think what I think when I say to myself ‘I am hungry’ by pointing to me and saying to yourself ‘He is hungry’. In his 1977 Perry identified belief states (what he there called senses) with what he called roles and what Kaplan called character. In later work (see in particular his 1980), Perry gives this identification up and individuates belief states in terms of their narrow functional role. Utterances of belief reporting sentences pragmatically implicate information about how the agent believes what she believes – they pragmatically implicate information about the type of belief state the agent is in – but semantically encode only information about what is believed. An utterance of (4) will typically pragmatically implicate false information about the type of belief state by which Lois grasps (and takes a positive attitude towards) the singular proposition concerning Clark Kent to the effect that he is strong; namely, it implicates that that belief state is linked to the sentence ‘Clark Kent is strong’. An utterance of (1), on the other hand, implicates the information that that belief state is linked to the sentence ‘Superman is strong’. This difference in implicating potential accounts for our intuitions that (1) and (4) convey different information. Those intuitions rightly represent the fact that there is a difference in the information an ordinary hearer will take from a typical utterance of (4) as opposed to a typical utterance of (1), but they are wrongly taken to show that (1) and (4) themselves thus differ in truth-value. What can the Naive Russellian say about the two Fregean arguments presented in section 1? They can claim that the principle of rationality, according to which an agent is irrational just in case she simultaneously believes a proposition and its negation, and the Converse Disquotation principle are false. Let’s see how. Perry 1977 argues that once we accept the distinction between belief states and belief contents, we should see that one can rationally believe a proposition and its negation by being in “distinct” belief states. Lois simultaneously believes that Superman is strong and that Superman is not strong. This does not call her rationality into question, as she believes the first proposition by being in a belief state properly related to ‘Superman is strong’ and believes the second by being in a belief state properly related to ‘Clark Kent is not strong’. Irrationality is believing a proposition and its negation in virtue of being in the same type of state, not merely believing a proposition and its negation. These considerations lead the Naive Russellian to reject the following principle that the first Fregean argument above relies upon. In its place, the Naive Russellian proposes the following principle. If Rationality is rejected and Rationality* adopted in its place, then the truth of (2) (i.e., ‘Lois believes that Clark Kent is not strong’) and (4) (i.e., ‘Lois believes that Clark Kent is strong’) does not entail that Lois is irrational. The truth of (2) and (4) entails that Lois believes a proposition and its negation. Given Rationality, this entails that Lois is irrational, which is untenable, as Lois cannot correct her mistake through reflection alone. But the truth of (2) and (4) do not entail that the belief states she is in in virtue of which Lois believes a proposition and its negation are the same type. Thus, given Rationality*, nothing about Lois’s irrationality follows from the truth of (2) and (4). Naive Russellianism is thus compatible with Lois’s rationality. What about the second Fregean argument from above, which attempted to derive (3) (i.e., ‘Lois does not believe that Clark Kent is strong’) and (4) from the assumption that (5) (i.e., ‘Superman is strong’) and (6) (i.e., ‘Clark Kent is strong’) express the same proposition and the fact that Lois accepts the one while rejecting the other? The Naive Russellian can claim that we should similarly reject Converse Disquotation, according to which, roughly, an agent does not believe a proposition insofar as she sincerely, reflectively, and competently withholds assent from a sentence that expresses that proposition, in favor of the following weaker principle. The original Converse Disquotation principle licenses inferring that one does not believe a given proposition from a single negative instance. That is, if there is one way in which an agent is presented with a proposition and rejects it, then the original Converse Disquotation principle allows us to infer that the agent does not believe that proposition and so that there is no way of grasping that proposition such that the agent affirms it. Given the Perry-inspired metaphysics of belief, however, that is implausibly strong, as it is rather like inferring that Sally didn’t walk to school from the fact that she didn’t walk to school naked. If Converse Disquotation is rejected and Converse Disquotation* is adopted in its place, then Lois’s acceptance patterns do not entail the contradictory (3) and (4). Lois’s acceptance of (5) and denial of (6) entail that Lois both believes and withholds belief from one and the same proposition, where withholding belief from a proposition involves grasping a proposition in a given way and taking a negative attitude towards it when so presented. Whereas simultaneously believing and not believing a single proposition is impossible, simultaneously believing and withholding belief from a single proposition is not. (This intermediate state between believing and not believing was first uncovered in Kaplan 1969. See also Salmon 1995a.) As indicated above, Braun follows the standard Naive Russellian in insisting that (1) and (4) say the same thing, but he departs from his fellow Naive Russellians by refusing to appeal to differences in the pragmatic potential of (1) and (4) in accounting for our “Frege intuitions.” He doubts such appeals are successful because he doubts that ordinary users of propositional attitude ascribing sentences have the necessary sophistication to impart information about how an agent believes what she believes. (Saul, in her 1998, 1999a/b, also doubts that the sort of information described above concerning belief states or how an agent believes what she believes could be pragmatically implicate, or indeed communicated in any way, by typical utterances of propositional attitude reporting sentences. She does not, however, offer Braun’s positive account.) He agrees that there is a difference in implicature-potential between the unembedded sentences (5) and (6) and he argues that this difference itself will account for our intuitions regarding the difference in truth-value between typical utterances of (1) and (4). There is no need, he argues, to go on and insist that typical utterances of (1) and (4) convey in any way information about how Lois believes what she believes. (See Braun 1998.) In subsequent papers Braun offers rich and interesting accounts of the role propositional attitude ascribing sentences play in explaining, predicting, and rationalizing behavior. (See Braun 2000, 2001a/b.)