 In Frege we have a fairly general interpretation of sentences as expressing functions applying to arguments. The view that I explore here is one that he develops in the 1890s. Consider the sentence My dog is asleep on the floor. This sentence, like all linguistic expressions, has both a sense and a referent. Its sense is an abstract object—a thought. Its referent is its truth value (which at the moment is the True). We will discuss Frege's analysis of the thought soon, but right now let us look at the referents of the expressions that make up this sentence. The expression ‘my dog’, according to Frege, is a singular term. It picks out an object (my dog, Zermela). The expression ‘is asleep on the floor’ refers to a concept. Concepts are functions. In this case, the concept is a function from objects to truth values (which are also objects). So, we can treat the above sentence as representing the concept __ is asleep on the floor as applying to the object my dog. Frege's concepts are very nearly propositional functions in the modern sense. Frege explicitly recognizes them as functions. Like Peirce's rhema, a concept is unsaturated. They are in some sense incomplete. Although Frege never gets beyond the metaphorical in his description of the incompleteness of concepts and other functions, one thing is clear: the distinction between objects and functions is the main division in his metaphysics. There is something special about functions that makes them very different from objects. Let us consider ‘my dog is asleep on the floor’ again. Frege thinks that this sentence can be analyzed in various different ways. Instead of treating it as expressing the application of __ is asleep on the floor to my dog, we can think of it as expressing the application of the concept my dog is asleep on __ to the object the floor (see Frege 1919). Frege recognizes what is now a commonplace in the logical analysis of natural language. We can attribute more than one logical form to a single sentence. Let us call this the principle of multiple analyses. Frege does not claim that the principle always holds, but as we shall see, modern type theory does claim this. With regard to the sense of sentences, they are also the result of applying functions to objects. The sense of ‘my dog’ is an abstract object. The sense of ‘is asleep on the floor’ is a function from individual senses, like that of ‘my dog’, to thoughts (see Frege 1891). The sense of ‘is asleep on the floor’ is a conceptual sense. It would seem that the principle of multiple analyses holds as much for senses as it does for referents. Frege, however, sometimes talks as if the senses of the constituent expressions of a sentence are actually contained somehow in the thought. It is difficult to understand how all such senses could be in the thought if there are different ways in which the sentence can be analyzed into constituent expressions. In addition to concepts and conceptual senses, Frege holds that there are extensions of concepts. Frege calls an extension of a concept a ‘course of values’. A course of values is determined by the value that the concept has for each of its arguments. Thus, the course of values for the concept __ is a dog records that its value for the argument Zermela is the True and for Socrates is the False, and so on. If two concepts have the same values for every argument, then their courses of values are the same. Thus, courses of values are extensional. For more about Frege's theory of concepts and its relation to his logic, see the entry on Frege's theorem and foundations for arithmetic.