 A reason is said to be a “normative reason” for acting because it favours someone’s acting. But what does it mean to say that a reason “favours” an action? One way of understanding this claim is in terms of justification: a reason justifies or makes it right for someone to act in a certain way. This is why normative reasons are also called “justifying” reasons. The term “normative reason” derives from the idea that there are norms, principles or codes that prescribe actions: they make it right or wrong to do certain things. To take a relatively trivial, culturally-determined example, the norms of etiquette in some countries say that when meeting someone for the first time, the right thing to do is to shake hands, whereas in other countries, the right thing to do is to kiss them on both cheeks. So the fact that in the UK shaking hands is the norm of etiquette is a reason that makes it right to do so in the UK when you meet someone for the first time. There are many other, often more important, norms, principles and values, implicit or explicit, that make it right to do or not do certain things. The existence of these norms or values depends on a variety of things: logical and natural relations, conventions, rules and regulations, etc. And the norms or values may be moral, prudential, legal, hedonic (relating to pleasure) or of some other kind. There are normative reasons, therefore, corresponding to the variety of values and norms: normative reasons that are moral, prudential, legal, hedonic, etc. The variety of norms or values that underpin normative reasons requires some modification of the claim that reasons that favour actions make those actions right. If a reason favours my doing something, then I have a “pro-tanto” reason to do it: it is pro tanto (i.e., to that extent) right for me to do it. But there may be a reason against my doing it: a pro-tanto reason not to do it. The fact that a joke is funny may be a reason to tell it; but the fact that it’ll embarrass someone may be a reason against doing so. In that case, I have a pro-tanto reason to tell the joke and a different pro-tanto reason not to tell it. Whether it would be right for me to tell the joke, whether I have an “all-things-considered” reason to tell it, will depend on whether either of the reasons is stronger than the other. If so, that reason will override or “defeat” the other reason. Only if the pro-tanto reason for telling the joke is undefeated will it be right or justified all things considered for me to tell the joke. But what sort of thing is a normative reason? What gives reasons their normative force, so that they can make it right for someone to do something? And what determines whether there is such a reason and to whom it applies? These and related questions have received much philosophical attention in recent years. There is consensus that normative reasons are facts (Raz 1975; Scanlon 1998), though the consensus is not universal. The question is complicated by disagreement about what facts of any kind are: are they concrete or abstract entities? Is a fact the same as the corresponding true proposition, or is the fact the “truth-maker” of the proposition? Are there any facts other than empirical facts, e.g., logical, mathematical, moral or aesthetic facts? For instance, it has been argued, notably by John Mackie, that there are no moral facts. Mackie argued against the existence of moral facts partially on the grounds that they would be metaphysically “queer”. He held that, if there are any moral facts, they would have to be both objective and necessarily motivating to those who are aware of them, and he claimed that it was wholly implausible that anything could have such properties (Mackie 1977). If Mackie is right that there are no moral facts, then either moral reasons are not normative reasons; or at least some normative reasons namely, moral reasons, are not facts. Among those who hold that normative reasons are facts, some hold that facts are true propositions and hence that reasons are also true propositions (Darwall 1983; Smith 1994; Scanlon 1998). Others reject the idea that normative reasons could be true propositions; for instance, Dancy (2000) does so on the grounds that propositions are abstract and representational (they represent the way the world is) but reasons must be concrete and non-representational (they are ways the world is). These problems are complex and have many ramifications but we cannot and perhaps need not resolve them here because the view that normative reasons are facts is generally meant to imply a very undemanding notion of facts. Thus Raz says that, “when saying that facts are reasons” he is using the term “fact” to designate There is less consensus about the basis of the normativity of practical reasons: the capacity of reasons to justify actions. On one proposal, the normativity of practical reasons depends on the goodness, intrinsic or instrumental, of doing what there is reason to do. This view is associated with Aristotle who, in the Nicomachean Ethics, links what is right to do (what one has reason to do) with what is conducive to the good (whether intrinsically or instrumentally). The idea was prevalent among medieval philosophers, for example Thomas Aquinas (Summa Theologiae, 1a, q.82), and in the 20th century it was central to Elizabeth Anscombe’s discussion of intentional actions (1957). Many contemporary philosophers (e.g., Raz 1999 and Dancy 2000) have offered accounts of the normativity of reasons in line with this idea, so a reason is a normative reason to do something because it picks the good-making features or value of the relevant action. As Raz puts it, “reasons are facts in virtue of which (…) actions are good in some respect and to some degree” (1999: 23). There are other accounts that ground the normativity of reasons on the concept of rationality (e.g., Korsgaard 1996, who is influenced by Kant; and Smith 1994 and Gert 2004, who base their accounts on the concept of the “ideally rational agent”). A different proposal, which echos Hume’s views about the relation between reason and passions, claims that the normativity of reasons is based on their relation to our desires. Accordingly, what one has reason to do depends ultimately on one’s desires and motivations. Roughly, someone’s having a reason to act requires their having some motivation that would be served by acting in the way favoured by the putative reason. The motivation may be such things as desires, plans, long-standing projects or values. And it may be something the agent actually has, or something she would have if she reasoned properly from her current motivations. Desire-based accounts of this sort have been defended recently by Williams 1979 and 1989, Schroeder 2008, and Goldman 2009. However we explain their normativity, normative reasons should be capable of motivating agents to act—though of course they may often fail to do so. Therefore, any account of normative reasons must offer a plausible explanation of the relationship between the normativity of reasons and the capacity that reasons have to motivate agents to act. An account must explain how thinking that there is a reason for me to do something can motivate me to act, and to act for that reason. Desire-based accounts of reasons might seem to have the edge here. If the reasons that apply to me depend on my antecedent motivations (desires, plans), then it is plausible that I shall be motivated to do what I believe will contribute to the satisfaction or furthering of those motivations. But desire-based accounts fare less well in accommodating another central claim about normative reasons. For it seems equally plausible that there are reasons (for instance, moral reasons) that apply to agents regardless of their motivations. Arguably, we all have reason to do what morality dictates, whether or not we are (or would be, if we reasoned consistently from our current motivations), motivated by those reasons. (For a detailed discussion of these issues, see the entry on  reasons for action: internal vs. external.) The claim that something is a normative reason for action is generally thought to be a “relational” claim: it establishes a relation between a fact, an agent, and an action kind. The relation is that of “being a reason for” (see Raz 1975 and 1998, Dancy 2004, Cuneo 2007). For example, the fact that a person has ingested a lethal poison may be a reason for the paramedics to give the person an antidote. According to some, the relation involves not just a person, a reason and an action, but more aspects: a time, circumstances, etc. (Skorupski 2010 and Scanlon 2014). This relational view of reasons gives a minimal sense in which claims about normative reasons are “agent-relative”: they relate agents to reasons (a more substantial sense is developed in Nagel 1970 and 1986 and discussed in the entry  reasons for action: agent-neutral vs. agent-relative).  But even in the minimal sense, the agent-relativity of reasons raises questions about the conditions that determine when a reason for acting applies to a particular agent. One such question, mentioned in the previous paragraph, is whether the reasons that apply to you depend on your desires and motivations. Another question is whether they depend on your knowledge and beliefs. To go back to the example of Othello: on the one hand it seems clear that Othello has no reason to kill Desdemona, and the reason he thinks he has—that she is unfaithful—is no reason at all. On the other hand, it might seem that Othello does have a reason, for he believes that Desdemona is unfaithful and believes, moreover, that his reputation has been damaged and needs to be restored with her death. And those beliefs appear to give him a reason to do what he does, at least from his perspective. Philosophers disagree about how to reconcile these competing claims. One way of resolving the tension between them is to say that Othello has no normative reason to kill Desdemona but has a motivating reason: viz., the falsehood he believes. Smith (1994) and Dancy (2000) both offer suggestions of this sort (though Smith calls Othello’s beliefs “his normative reasons”). Others, e.g., Schroeder (2008), talk about “objective” and “subjective” normative reasons, so that Othello would have a subjective normative reason but no objective normative reason to kill Desdemona. These positions are all “objectivist” in that they presuppose that whether an agent has an (objective) normative reason to act depends solely on the facts and not on the agent’s beliefs (see Williams 1979). “Perspectivists” take a different view. They claim that whether someone has a normative reason to do something is not independent of her perspective, which includes her beliefs (see Fantl and McGrath 2009 and Gibbons 2010). Certain cases of ignorance and mistake help to bring out their view. A much discussed case introduced by Williams (1979) concerns an agent, call him Sam, who orders a gin and tonic and, when served a glass with a liquid that looks like gin and tonic, forms the belief that it is gin and tonic, when in fact the glass contains petrol and ice. Does Sam have a normative reason to drink what’s in the glass? The objectivists say that the answer depends solely on the facts, so Sam has no normative reason to drink the liquid. Perspectivists, by contrast, say that given Sam’s perspective, which includes a reasonable (though false) belief that the liquid is gin and tonic, Sam does have a normative reason to drink what’s in the glass. Perspectivists tend to defend their position by reference to considerations of rationality. Agents are often in situations in which they don’t know all the relevant facts. And yet, perspectivists say, these agents often do what is reasonable or rational for them to do, given their perspective. If, as seems plausible, one acts rationally when one acts for reasons that make it rational for one to so act, then perspectivism must be right: agents who act in error or ignorance often act rationally and, when they do, they act for reasons they have to do what they do. In short, as perspectivism says, the normative reasons an agent has depend in an important sense on his epistemic perspective, and so an agent can have a normative reason that is a false belief. Similar arguments are articulated in relation to justification (though often questions about rationality and justification are run together). Surely, the argument goes, what an agent is justified in doing depends on whether he has reasons that justify his doing that thing. But, again, there are cases where an agent would surely be justified in doing something even though there are conclusive reasons against doing it; and he would be justified precisely because he doesn’t know about those reasons. For example, the fact that the cake is poisoned is a conclusive reason not to offer it to your guests. But you might be justified in offering it to them, the perspectivist says, if you don’t know about the poison. So considerations about the justification of action also seem to support perspectivism because they show that what reasons you have depends on your perspective. There are several moves that an opponent of perspectivism can make in response here. She can concede that an agent who acts according to his epistemic perspective but guided by a false belief acts rationally, but deny that acting rationally requires that the agent act for normative reasons. Instead, the objectivist may say, acting rationally only requires acting in a way that is consistent with one’s beliefs, so long as these are themselves rational. This response could rely on, e.g., Derek Parfit’s conception of rationality, which requires acting guided by one’s real or apparent reasons (Parfit 2001, an “apparent reason” is a falsehood that an agent believes to be true, and treats as a normative reason but which is not a normative reason; see also Kolodny 2005). As for the justification of action, the objectivist can deny that the actions of agents who act in ignorance or guided by a mistaken belief are justified. Whether the action is justified, the objectivist will say, depends purely on whether the facts make it the right thing to do, and not on the agent’s beliefs. So in the cake example above, the action of offering the poisoned cake to his guests is not justified: there is no normative reason that makes it the right thing to do. And that is so regardless of what the agent knows or believes. A different question, the objectivist will say, is whether an agent who does something wrong because of his false beliefs or ignorance is himself justified and/or blameworthy for so acting. If our host’s ignorance about the poison is not culpable, he will most likely not be blameworthy and the agent may be justified. But in saying this, the objectivist need not be conceding that the action was justified, i.e., done for a normative reason, only that the host may be exculpated for doing the wrong thing. As Austin noted (1957), we must distinguish between a justification and an excuse. When accused of wrongdoing, one may offer a justification, which aims to show that in fact the thing done was right because there was reason for doing it. Alternatively, one may offer an excuse: admit that one did the wrong thing but plead to be partly or wholly exculpated—for instance, because it was done out of ignorance or mistake. (There are other excuses, such as accidents or coercion but those need not concern us here.) To return to the cake example, our agent might be excused for doing the wrong thing (poisoning the guests) if he was non-culpably ignorant about the poison. By contrast, it might be possible to give a justification for poisoning the guests: for instance, that they were in fact some psychopaths intent on causing his family mortal harm. If so, poisoning them with the cake may have been the right thing to do and, depending on whether our agent was aware of the relevant facts and acted guided by them, it may be that he was justified in poisoning them. This example shows how questions about normative reasons bear directly on the justification of agents, as distinct from the justification of their actions, by raising questions about motivating reasons, to which we now turn.