 It was suggested above that although reasons are traditionally divided into two kinds: normative and motivating/explanatory, there may be a case for distinguishing between motivating reasons and explanatory reasons. The basis for doing so was said to be the existence of three distinct questions about reasons: whether a reason favours an action; whether a reason motivates an agent; and whether a reason explains an agent’s action. Accordingly, the thought goes, we should recognise three kinds of reasons: normative, motivating and explanatory. This way of classifying reasons is explicitly accepted and/or defended by various authors (Baier 1958; Alvarez 2007, 2009a, 2010; Hieronymi 2011); and it is hinted at, using different terminology, by others (Smith 1994; Darwall 2003; Mantel 2014). This three-part classification may seem excessively refined: is it really necessary or advantageous to distinguish motivating and explanatory reasons? After all, a motivating reason can always explain the action that it motivates, so the question of what reason motivates an agent and what reason explains her action are, one might think, fundamentally the same. If so, “motivating” and “explanatory” are surely just different labels for the same kind of reason, at least in contexts of intentional actions. And there appears to be no obvious advantage in regarding motivating and explanatory reasons as distinct kinds. These considerations against a three-part classification of reasons, though plausible, are not decisive. First, the fact that the same reason can answer different questions does not show that the questions are not importantly different and, consequently that the reasons that answer those questions are not of different kinds. We saw that to be so for normative and motivating reasons: the same reason can answer a question about motivation and one about justification. And yet, that does not blur the difference between those questions, nor does it undermine the importance of recognising the corresponding two kinds of reasons. So the same may be true for motivating and explanatory reasons. Second, even if the same reason sometimes answers the two questions about motivation and explanation, this is not always so. Although a reason that motivates an action can always explain it, a reason that can explain the action is not always the reason that motivates it. For example, that he is jealous is a reason that explains why Othello kills Desdemona. But that is not the reason that motivates him to kill her. This example may appear not to be to the point because an explanation that refers to his jealousy is not a rationalisation of Othello’s action: it doesn’t explain his action by citing his reason. That is right and yet the example still shows that not all reasons that explain by citing psychological factors, e.g., jealousy, are reasons that motivate. Moreover, knowing that Othello acted out of jealousy gives an indication of Othello’s reason (Desdemona’s suspected unfaithfulness) and yet the reason of jealousy is not Othello’s motivating reason. Besides, the explaining and motivating reasons may differ even in cases where the reason that explains makes reference to the reason that motivates. For suppose that John punches Peter because he finds out that Peter has betrayed him. The fact that John knows that Peter has betrayed him is a reason that explains John’s action. This is an explanatory reason. But that fact about John’s mental state of knowledge is not the reason for which John punches Peter. That reason is a fact about Peter, namely that he has betrayed John. That is the reason that motivates John to punch Peter—his motivating reason. So in this case we have two different (though related) reasons: that Peter has betrayed John and that John knows that Peter has betrayed him, which play different roles. One reason motivates John to punch Peter (the betrayal); and the other explains why he does it (the knowledge of the betrayal). To be sure, the latter reason explains by reference to the former. Nonetheless, these are different reasons that answer different questions about motivation and explanation, respectively. But isn’t this distinction superficial? After all, the fact that motivates John, i.e., that Peter has betrayed him, can also explain John’s action—we need not cite John’s knowledge of this fact. As we shall see below  (3.2),  this is controversial: some philosophers think that all reason explanations require reference to psychological states of the agent. Be that as it may, consider a different example. The fact that Othello believes that Desdemona is unfaithful explains why he kills her. But the fact that he believes in her infidelity is not the reason in light of which he kills her, the reason that, in his eyes, favours killing her. What he takes to favour killing her is the (putative) fact that she is unfaithful. Again, these are importantly different reasons: for it can be the case that Othello believes that Desdemona is unfaithful without it being the case that she is, and vice versa. Moreover, since Desdemona is not unfaithful, that putative fact cannot be what explains Othello’s action because something that is not the case cannot explain anything—though, as we shall see below (also  3.2),  this view of explanation has proved controversial too. The intricacies of these controversies suggest that it may indeed be helpful to keep apart questions of motivation and questions of explanation even when we are dealing with reason explanations of action. The advantages of drawing this distinction will be spelled out in examining debates concerning motivating reasons and the explanation of action. We shall see there that apparently competing claims about motivating reasons and the explanation of action are often best understood and resolved as claims about motivating or explanatory reasons, respectively. The following passage, in which Stephen Darwall comments on a putative disagreement between Dancy and Michael Smith, helps to illustrate the point of the distinction: Using the terminology introduced above, we can reframe Darwall’s point as follows. When Dancy says that reasons are (putative) facts that agents take to favour their actions, he is talking about motivating reasons. By contrast, when Smith says that reasons are combinations of mental states of believing and desiring, he is talking about explanatory reasons. So Dancy and Smith may not be disagreeing but, rather, using the same term, “motivating reason” for two different concepts: Dancy is using it to refer to the reasons in light of which an agent acts, while Smith is using it to refer to the reasons that explain an agent’s act. One of the most intensely debated issues concerning both motivating and explanatory reasons is their ontology: what kind of thing are these reasons? The philosophical literature of the last half of the 20th century was premised on the more or less explicit assumption that motivating and explanatory reasons, which at the time were not normally explicitly distinguished, were psychological entities, in particular, mental states of agents, such as Othello’s believing that Desdemona is unfaithful to him. This view of the ontology of reasons is often called “Psychologism”. That consensus began to dissolve at the turn of the century and psychologism came under sustained attack. Opposition to it is variously labelled “non-psychologism”, “externalism” and “objectivism”. The last two labels are also used for a variety of other philosophical views so, to avoid confusion, I will stick with the term “Non-psychologism”. Donald Davidson’s 1963 paper, “Actions, Reasons, and Causes” is often cited as the locus classicus of psychologism. In that paper he characterises a reason as follows: A primary reason is a combination of two mental states: a pro-attitude and a belief. These “primary reasons” are, in effect, explanatory reasons: reasons that explain actions. Davidson defended the “desire-belief” model of action explanation, according to which reasons are states of believing and desiring that explain actions because they cause them. This model is at the centre of Davidson’s account of intentional action, which he characterises as an event caused “in the right way” by a primary reason. Davidson’s paper was highly influential; as a result, psychologism became the dominant view for both motivating and explanatory reasons, which, as noted above, were then not explicitly distinguished. Psychologism is very appealing. For it seems right that when an agent acts for a reason, he acts motivated by an end that he desires (an end towards which he has a “pro-attitude”) and guided by a belief about how to achieve that end. Because of this, it is possible to explain his action by citing his desiring and his believing the relevant things. To return to our example, we can explain why Othello kills Desdemona by citing his wanting to defend his honour and his believing that, given that Desdemona has been unfaithful, killing her is the only way to do so. And this sort of explanation in terms of states of belief and desire supports the relevant counterfactuals: had Othello not believed that she had been unfaithful or had he not believed that killing her was the only way to defend his honour, he wouldn’t have killed her, even if he had still wanted to restore his reputation; and had he not cared about his reputation, he wouldn’t have killed her, despite his beliefs about her betrayal and what was necessary to defend his honour. This sort of consideration led to widespread acceptance of the view that explanatory reasons are mental states and, since the latter were not distinguished from motivating reasons, it also led to the view that motivating reasons are mental states. Among psychologists, some say that motivating and explanatory reasons are mental or psychological facts, rather than mental states. This is because psychologism holds that reasons are mental states such as “an agent’s believing (or wanting, or knowing) something”, and it is easy to move from the claim that someone’s reason is his believing something (a mental state) to the claim that his reason is that he believes something (a psychological fact). For instance, it is easy to move from saying that Joe’s reason for running is his believing that he’s late (a mental state) to saying that Joe’s reason is (the fact) that he believes that he’s late. These defenders of psychologism do not on the face of it disagree with champions of non-psychologism about the ontology of these reasons. For psychological facts are not themselves mental states, though they are facts about mental states. But they still disagree with non-psychologists about what these reasons are. Because of this, we need a way to distinguish between psychologism and non-psychologism other than in terms of ontology—the kind of thing that each camp says reasons are—in order to capture the deeper disagreement between them. Perhaps a better way to do so is to say that psychologism holds that motivating and explanatory reasons are mental states or facts about mental states of agents, whereas non-psychologism says that motivating and explanatory reasons, like normative reasons, are facts about all sorts of things, including mental states of agents. The following sections examine current debates about psychologism, and other issues, concerning motivating and explanatory reasons. It does so separately for reasons of each kind, as that will facilitate clarity in the various debates. We start with motivating reasons. The term “motivating reason” is a semi-technical philosophical term. As we saw above, the phrase is now generally used in the literature to refer to a reason that the agent takes to favour her action, and in light of which she acts. Motivating reasons are also considerations that can figure as premises in the practical reasoning, if any, that leads to action. The terms “agential reason”, “the agent’s normative reason”, “subjective (normative) reasons”, “the agent’s operative reason” and “possessed reasons” are sometimes also used to capture this notion of a reason. Because the concept is somewhat technical, further clarification is needed. First, the current use of the term excludes some otherwise plausible candidates from being motivating reasons. For instance, someone’s goal or intention in acting, which is something the agent desires (to grow vegetables; to kill Desdemona) seem to be motivating factors in acting. But because these are not considerations in light of which one acts, they do not fall under the category “motivating reasons” as currently understood (but see Audi 1993). Similarly, a state of desiring (wanting to have one’s revenge), or a motive or emotion (for instance, jealousy) can be states “that encompass motivation”, to use Mele’s phrase, 2003: if one is in any such a mental state, one is thereby motivated to act. But again, these are not motivating reasons in the sense at issue because they are not considerations that the agent takes to favour acting. Moreover, many hold that states of desiring are often grounded in considerations about the goodness or value of what is desired—a view defended by Anscombe 1957, Nagel 1970, Quinn 1993, Raz 1999, and Schueler 2003, among others. When this is so, the motivating reasons both for wanting and for acting accordingly are the considerations about the goodness or rightness of what is desired. To continue with our example, Othello’s desire to kill Desdemona is grounded in the thoughts that she is unfaithful to him and that killing her is a fitting way to restore his reputation (even if the desire is intensified by his jealousy). These considerations are his reason for wanting to kill her and his reason for doing so. In short, what Othello desires (to kill Desdemona), his goal (to redress her betrayal), his state of desiring those things, or his motive (jealousy) are things that motivate him to kill Desdemona but they are not his motivating reasons in the semi-technical sense of the phrase stipulated above. His motivating reasons, if we agree he has any, are, rather, the putative facts that she is unfaithful to him and that killing her is a fitting way to restore his reputation. Second, talk of an agent’s motivating reason, or of “the agent’s reason”, always involves some simplification. It’s a simplification because an agent may be motivated to act by more than one reason: I may hoover the house early in the morning both because I won’t have time to do it later and because it will annoy my inconsiderate neighbour. Moreover, a fact will seem a reason for me to act only in combination with other facts: that I won’t have time to hoover later will seem a reason to do it now only if the house needs hovering. So my reason is, arguably, a combination of at least two facts: that the house needs hovering and that I won’t be able to do it later. Finally, I may consider a fact that counts against acting, for instance, that hoovering early will also disturb my other neighbour, who is very considerate. If I still decide to hoover, I do not act for that “con-reason” but, arguably, I am still guided by it if I give it some weight in my deliberation (see Ruben 2009 for a discussion of “con-reasons”). Since motivating reasons are considerations that an agent takes to favour acting, and since the reasons that favour acting are facts, it might seem that motivating reasons are also facts or at least putative facts, rather than mental states. However, the view that they are mental states was, as noted earlier, the dominant view till the turn of the 20th century, and it is still very popular today. A seemingly compelling argument for adopting psychologism for motivating reasons is the following. For a reason to motivate you it must be a reason you have. This does not require that the reason should genuinely apply to you. But it requires that you “possess” the reason: you must know or believe the consideration that constitutes the reason. And this appears to support the view that reasons are mental states of agents, or facts about those states. The opponent of psychologism about motivating reasons can respond by noting that, while it is true that, for it to motivate you to act, you must know or believe the thing that constitutes a reason, that doesn’t imply that the reason that motivates you is your knowing or believing what you do. Rather your reason is what is known or believed: a (putative) fact. To put the point differently, motivating reasons are the contents of mental states but not mental states themselves. This argument about motivating reasons is not, therefore, decisive for psychologism. And in fact, there are several compelling arguments against psychologism. A very influential argument, found in Dancy 1995 and 2000, focuses on the relation between normative and motivating reasons. The argument hinges on Dancy’s claim that any account of motivating reasons must meet what he calls “the normative constraint”: Dancy’s charge against psychologism about motivating reasons is that it fails to meet the constraint because, if psychologism is right, we can never act for a good reason. Why? In order to act for a good reason, we need to act for a reason that is or could be a fact. However, according to psychologism, motivating reasons are mental states. If so, the reasons for which we act are mental states, and not facts. If, by contrast, motivating reasons were, say facts and putative facts, then some of the reasons for which we act would be facts, and it would follow that we can, and sometimes do, act for a good reason. But in saying that motivating reasons are mental states, psychologism eliminates this possibility, for a mental state can never be a fact. As Dancy puts it, psychologism has the consequence that “the reasons why we act can never be among the reasons in favour of acting” (2000: 105). The argument relies on the “identity thesis” about reasons: the thesis that you act for a good reason, only if your motivating reason is identical to the normative reason that favours your action (see Heuer 2004 for a helpful explanation). Dancy (2000: 106ff.) considers a possible response: that acting for a good reason may simply require your motivating reason to be a mental state whose content is a good reason. So, you act for a good reason if your motivating reason for, say, taking your umbrella is your believing that it is raining, which is a mental state whose content—“it is raining”—is a good reason to take your umbrella. The success of this response to Dancy’s argument is unclear. On the one hand, if the response is that the reasons that motivate us are the contents of our mental states of believing, this meets the normative constraint but it does not favour psychologism. It meets the normative constraint because the content is the fact that it is raining and that is a good reason. But this interpretation amounts to abandoning psychologism because the contents of mental states are not themselves mental states. On the other hand, the response might be just the assertion that a mental state with the right content can be a good reason for acting. But this does not seem so much a response to Dancy’s argument as a refusal to engage with it. For it remains unclear how, according to this response, we can ever act for a good (i.e., a normative) reason (but see Mantel 2014 for an attempt to develop the objection by rejecting the identity thesis). This brings us to another, related argument against psychologism, which is simply that consideration of what agents take their reasons for acting to be, and of what they typically give and accept as their reasons for acting, count against psychologism. Thus, as Othello considers what to do, even while in the grip of his jealousy, his reasoning does not include considerations about whether he believes this or that but rather considerations about what Desdemona has or has not done. The things that Othello considers, then, are not his mental states but rather facts, or alleged facts, about the world around him, in particular about Desdemona. This argument is reinforced by considering that motivating reasons are the reasons that would figure as premises in a reconstruction of the agent’s practical reasoning, if any. Again, these premises are sometimes considerations to the effect that one believes this or that; but much more often, they are considerations about the world, about the value or goodness of things and people around us, the means of achieving those things, etc. In short, although practical reasoning sometimes includes psychological facts about oneself among its premises, much more often these premises refer to (perceived or real) facts about the world beyond our minds. These arguments lend substantial support to non-psychologism and suggest that being motivated by a reason is not acting in light of, or guided by, a mental state, or by a fact about one’s mental states. Along with other arguments, they have led many philosophers (see Alvarez 2008, 2009b, 2010; Bittner 2001; Dancy 2000, 2008; Hornsby 2007, 2008: Hyman 1999, 2015; McDowell 2013; Raz 1999; Schueler 2003; Stout 1996; Stoutland 1998; Williamson 2000, among others) to reject psychologism. But non-psychologism is not free from difficulties. A central problem for non-psychologism is presented by “error cases”. If motivating reasons are facts, then what is the agent’s reason in cases, like Othello’s, where the agent is in error and is motivated to act by a false consideration? In such a case, what the agent would give as his reason—say, that Desdemona has been unfaithful—is false. So, Othello cannot act in light of the fact that Desdemona has been unfaithful. And non-psychologism does not seem to have a ready answer to what the motivating reason is in these cases. Non-psychologists have offered different proposals to accommodate error cases. One proposal is to say that in error cases agents act for a reason that is a falsehood that the agent believes. So, in the example above, Othello’s reason is his false belief about Desdemona. Note—not his believing that she’s unfaithful, which would bring us back to psychologism, but his false belief (the content). According to this proposal, then, Othello did act for a reason: a false belief, which is a putative fact that the agent takes to be a fact. The view is defended or at least endorsed by many, among others: Dancy (2000, 2008, 2014), Hornsby (2007, 2008), McDowell (2013), Schroeder (2008), Setiya (2007), and Comesaña and McGrath (2014). Jennifer Hornsby defends the view in the process of offering a disjunctive conception of a reason for acting, analogous to McDowell’s “disjunctive conception of appearances” (Hornsby 2008: 251), summarized in the following passage: This response to problem of error cases is plausible but there are also considerations against it. One such consideration is that stating these alleged reasons often leads to paradox or infelicitous claims. For many would argue that a claim such as “Ellie’s reason for stepping on your toes is that you are stepping on her toes, although you are not stepping on her toes” is paradoxical. By contrast, there is no air of paradox whatsoever in the corresponding claim about Ellie’s beliefs: “Ellie believes that you’re stepping on her toes although you are not”. Thus, Unger writes: If this is right, then the operator “her reason is that …”, unlike “her belief is that …” is factive: the truth of the propositions expressed by sentences formed with “her reason is that…” requires the truth of the proposition expressed with the “that” clause. This response to the error cases—that a reason can be a falsehood—is therefore problematic. A related difficulty is that this view commits one to awkward claims about reasons, such as Dancy’s claim that one’s reason for acting may be “a reason that is no reason” (Dancy 2000: 3; he qualifies this with the parenthesis “no good reason, that is”), or Hornsby’s claim that sometimes it is the case that “there was no reason to do what he did, even though he did it for a reason” (Hornsby 2008: 249; though again, she clarifies that the first clause denies that there is an “F-type” reason, a fact, while the second asserts that the agent had a “B-type”). The awkwardness of these claims is further supported by considerations about usage, for it seems that claims about what someone’s reason is are often retracted and qualified on learning that the person was mistaken concerning what he or she believed. If I say that Lisa’s reason for attending the party is that James will be there, and you tell me that he won’t be at the party, it would sound paradoxical if I insist that her reason is that James will be at the party. The fact that these claims about reasons are prima facie paradoxical or infelicitous is not a decisive argument against the views that generate them, but it has led some non-psychologists to offer alternative accounts of error cases. One such alternative says that, in error cases, an agent acts on something that he treats as a reason and in light of which he acts but which is in fact not a reason. So, in these cases an agent acts for an “apparent reason” (Alvarez 2010 and Williamson forthcoming). The view is also defended by Parfit, who characterizes apparent reasons as follows: “We have some apparent reason when we have some belief whose truth would give us that reason” (2001: 25). On this view, an apparent motivating reason is not merely a bad reason but simply not a reason. So according to this alternative, agents who act on false beliefs are motivated by something, a false belief. They treat that belief as a reason and are guided by it in acting. Nonetheless, that false belief is not a motivating reason because it is not a fact, but merely an apparent fact, and hence only an apparent reason. It might appear that the difference between these two non-psychological alternatives boils down to just a terminological dispute: some philosophers choose to call these false beliefs “false”, “subjective”, or “bad reasons”, etc., while others choose to call them “apparent reasons”. Surely, the thought would go, terminology is a matter of choice and nothing of substance depends on this choice. What matters is that every proposal contains clear definitions of how terms are being used. A response would be that some terminological choices are more apt than others because they reflect a more nuanced or precise understanding of the relevant concept. The substantial issue behind this debate seems to be whether the notion of a reason we apply in different contexts is a unified notion. If it is, the choice between the alternative non-psychological views outlined in the previous paragraphs will depend largely on what features are taken to be essential to that notion. We noted above that most if not all accounts of acting for a motivating reason require as a condition that the agent be in some kind of epistemic relation to the reason that motivates her. And we saw also that a widespread view is that this epistemic relation is one of belief: for an agent to act for the reason that p, the agent must believe that p. It is this thought that led many to endorse the view that reasons are mental states (often as part of the “desire-belief” conception of reasons for action described above). But the view that mere belief is not sufficient to act for a reason has gained popularity in recent years. And many have argued that, in order to act in light of a fact that is a reason, an agent needs to  know the relevant fact. The view is explicitly defended by Unger (1975), Hyman (1999, 2011 and 2015), Williamson (2000 and forthcoming), Hornsby (2007 and 2008 (as part of her disjunctive conception mentioned above)), and McDowell (2013)—but many others also endorse it. The basic idea behind this position is that an agent may act on the basis of a belief merely by treating that belief (i.e., what she believes) as a reason for acting. However, if there is a fact in virtue of which her belief is true, then she acts in light of that fact, or is guided by that fact, only if she knows that fact. If the agent does not know the fact, we cannot say that she was guided by it (Hyman), or that she was responding rationally to it (McDowell). If the agent does not know the fact, the argument goes, the relationship between the agent’s acting as she did and the fact is fortuitous, a matter of luck or coincidence, and hence not sufficient for the fact to be her reason for acting. And this, they argue, is so even in cases where an agent acts motivated by a belief that is both true and justified. For just as Gettier (1963) showed that having a justified true belief is not sufficient for having knowledge of the corresponding fact, so, these authors argue, acting on a justified true belief is not enough for acting in light of the corresponding fact: the connection between the fact and the action is fortuitous. (See entries on  the analysis of knowledge  and  epistemology  for discussions of Gettier’s arguments). Those who think that acting for a reason requires merely treating something one believes as a ground, e.g., using it as a premise in one’s reasoning, reject this characterisation of acting for a reason—Dancy (2011 and 2014) is an example. But defenders of the knowledge condition complain that Dancy’s remarks are off-target. For their point is that there is a notion of acting for a reason—arguably, the central notion—that involves the idea of acting guided by a fact. This notion requires not mere belief but knowledge of the fact that is a reason. Others have argued that it is, however, possible to accept that there is this distinctive, central notion of acting for a reason but still deny that an agent needs to know a fact in order to act guided by it. Dustin Locke (2015), for example, argues that it is possible for someone to act guided by a fact that he does not know. Locke uses so-called “fake-barn” cases to make his point against the knowledge condition. These cases are due to Alvin Goldman (1967) who developed them in his defence of his theory of knowledge. Suppose that a man is driving in the countryside and sees a barn. Unbeknown to him, he’s driving in “fake-barn country”, which is littered with fake barns: barn façades designed to look like real barns. The widely held consensus is that a person in a fake-barn situation who, on seeing a real barn, forms the belief that there is a barn, does not know that there is a barn, even though he has a justified true belief to that effect. Locke uses this sort of case to argue that a person in this situation could, for instance, drive towards a barn guided by the fact that there is a barn over there, without knowing that there is. If so, Locke claims, the agent acts for the reason that there is a barn over there, since he is guided by that fact. Nonetheless, he doesn’t know that there is a barn. (For further discussion of practical reasoning, the knowledge condition and fake-barn situations see Hawthorne 2004, Brown 2008 and Neta 2009.) These debates about motivating reasons focus primarily on what sort of thing motivating reasons are and what it takes for an agent to act for a reason. We now turn to when and how reasons explain actions. A person’s action may be explained in a variety of ways: by reference to the agent’s goal, or habits, or character traits, or to her reasons for acting. For instance, we may say that Jess went to the hospital in order to reassure her father, or that she went because she always goes on Tuesdays, or because she is a dutiful daughter, or because her father was in intensive care. These statements explain why Jess went to the hospital because, given certain background assumptions, they enable a third person to understand Jess’s action: they make it intelligible. In the examples just given, the first explanation gives us Jess’s goal in going to the hospital (to reassure her father), the second and third place her action in the context of her habits (she does it every Tuesday) and her character (she’s dutiful), respectively, and the fourth explanation gives a reason why she did it that was her reason for doing it: a reason that, from her perspective, spoke in favour of going to the hospital (that her father was in intensive care). Among this variety of possible explanations (and there are more), the last one is a distinctive type that is of particular interest here because it is an explanation of an intentional action that rationalises the action: it explains the action by citing the agent’s reason for acting. In Davidson’s words: One argument in favour of psychologism for explanatory reasons that rationalise actions depends on the following idea. For a reason to be able to rationalise your action, that reason must be part of your psychology: a fact that is merely “out there” cannot explain why you do anything. Your believing or knowing that fact, by contrast, can explain why you act. So the reasons that explain your actions must be mental states (believings, knowings, etc.). It might be responded that, although a fact cannot be a reason that explains one’s action unless the person is aware of it, it does not follow that the explanation of the action must mention their awareness of the reason. For instance, we can explain why Jess went to the hospital by citing her reason for going, namely that her father had been admitted to the intensive care unit—this points to something she saw in the action that made it desirable: e.g., that she could then be with her father in this difficult moment. The explanation does not need to mention any psychological fact, such as the fact that she knew that her father had been admitted, even though the explanation presupposes this fact. Against this suggestion, a defender of psychologism for explanatory reasons might urge that these explanations are elliptical and when fully spelled out their explanans (the part of the explanation that does the explaining) contains facts about what she knew or believed. But are these explanations really elliptical? It seems undeniable that a person cannot act for the reason that p, or on the grounds that p, unless she stands in some epistemic relation to p: she needs to believe, know, accept, etc. that p. However, it does not follow that all full rationalisations need mention psychological facts and that, when they don’t, this is because they’ve been given in elliptical form. Perhaps the fact that the agent knows the relevant things is simply a necessary condition for her reason to be the explanans in a reason explanation. Or as Dancy suggests, her knowing or believing may be an “enabling condition” for the explanation (Dancy 2000: 127). However that issue about rationalisations is decided, two things should be noted. First, in “error cases”—cases when an agent acts on the basis of a falsehood that he believes and treats as a reason for acting—the explanans of a true explanation must be a psychological fact. For instance, the explanation of why Othello kills Desdemona cannot be what he believes, that Desdemona has been unfaithful, but rather the fact that he believes it. This is because explanations are, it is generally thought, factive: a true explanation cannot have a falsehood as its explanans: we cannot say that Othello kills Desdemona because she has been unfaithful when she hasn’t. The second thing to note is that, even if psychologism is right for explanatory reasons (that is, even if all reason explanations cite psychological facts), it does not follow that psychologism is right for motivating reasons because these reasons need not be the same. In other words, if one attends to the distinction between the roles of motivation and explanation that reasons can play, there should be no temptation to move from psychologism concerning explanatory reasons in some or in all cases, to psychologism concerning motivating reasons. Not all opponents of psychologism accept the suggestion that explanatory reasons in rationalisations are mental states, or facts about them, even for error cases. For example, in his 2000 book, Dancy denies this and argues that we can always explain an action by specifying the reason for which it was done, even when an agent acted on a false consideration. The problem with this view is that it commits Dancy to the conclusion that some reason explanations are non-factive: an explanation may be true even though what does the explaining is not. For instance, it commits him to saying that what explains why I took my umbrella is that it was raining, even though it was not raining. To most philosophers this is an unacceptable conclusion: surely true explanations require the truth of both the explanandum (what is explained: that I took my umbrella) and the explanans (that it was raining). In a recent paper (2014), Dancy has abandoned his earlier view that reason explanations can be non-factive but he still retains his opposition to psychologism for explanatory reasons. So he still maintains that we can always explain an action by specifying the reason for which it was done, even when the “reason” is some falsehood that the agent believed and in light of which he acted. In those cases, he says, He adds that in such cases the reason itself “need not be the case and does not make the sort of distinct contribution to the explanation that would enable us to think of it as the explanans” (2014: 91). Philosophers may disagree about whether this new suggestion is satisfactory. Some may think that “Othello killed Desdemona for the reason that Desdemona had been unfaithful to him, although she had not been unfaithful to him” sounds paradoxical. Moreover, to say that the reason that explains an action is (the fact) that it was done for the reason that p enables Dancy to accommodate the view that explanations are factive. But it does so at the expense of undermining his claim that the reasons that explain are also the reasons that motivate. For Dancy says that the reason that motivates Othello is that Desdemona is unfaithful, while, according to this new suggestion, the reason that explains his action (i.e., the explanans) is that it was done for the reason that she is unfaithful. Whatever one thinks about Dancy’s new proposal it is worth emphasizing again that the distinction between explanatory and motivating reasons enables one to bypass these issues. For one can say that the reason that explains why Othello kills Desdemona is the psychological fact that he believes that she has been unfaithful without accepting that that is the reason that motivates him. His motivating reason for killing her is the putative fact that she has been unfaithful (which, as we saw above, some would describe as merely an apparent reason). In short, even if some form of psychologism is right for explanatory reasons, it does not follow that it is right for motivating reasons: the two may differ from each other in some cases.