 The Syntax is probably Carnap’s best-known book, and has attracted much of the renewed attention to Carnap in recent years. At the time of its publication, the Vienna Circle was disintegrating, its members were fleeing from political persecution, and philosophical communication was disrupted. Its English translation, published 1937, lacked context and was almost uniformly misunderstood by nearly everyone, with the partial exception of Quine, whose later work in logic, the philosophy of logic, and logic-based philosophy was inspired by—though sometimes opposed to—the Logical Syntax. Through Quine, some of Carnap’s ideas eventually also found their way into the logic education of many philosophy departments in the US. On the other hand, what Quine understood, as is evident from his 1934 Harvard Lectures, immediately after the book’s publication (reprinted in Creath 1990), was the first draft of the Logical Syntax, in which the principle of tolerance was still absent. So even his comprehension of the Syntax was partial and one-sided (Creath 1987, Friedman 2006). In any case, the book was widely assumed to have been superseded by the time the translation appeared, now that Carnap had meanwhile embraced semantics and dropped his insistence on the “formal mode of speech” (above,  section 1.3).  Only recently, therefore, has the Syntax come to be appreciated in its full radicalism. In this recent work, the principle of tolerance has attracted the most attention. Previously, the rejection of meaning and insistence on the formal, rather than the material, mode of speech had been in the foreground since, after all, the entire philosophical Part V of the book had been devoted to it, and Quine had reinforced that emphasis. It is fair to say that the principle of tolerance taken by itself—unlike the notion of analyticity or theses of conventionalism (see the supplement  Carnap vs Quine on the Analytic-Synthetic Distinction)—was  hardly discussed before its present, belated reception in the Carnap literature. It is a new idea on the philosophical scene today, whose consequences are still being digested. It certainly has lost none of its explosive revolutionary force as a radical program for philosophy (Creath 2009), and this is what has most divided commentators. Like most revolutionary ideas, it has encountered steadfast and vocal resistance. Most commentators have been concerned to limit the scope of the principle of tolerance, to dilute it or trivialize it, while the appreciative minority has mostly remained defensive. Much of the literature, therefore, is devoted to clarification and the correction of misunderstandings (e.g., Goldfarb & Ricketts 1992; Ricketts 1994; Goldfarb 1995), rather than positive explorations of the principle of tolerance and its consequences (with a few exceptions: Carus 2017, Kitcher 2008, Creath 2009, Kutz, Mossakowski, and Lücke 2010, Justus 2012). Thus the remainder of this section will, after a brief exposition of the book’s contents, focus on these recent discussions and clarifications. Carnap’s principle of tolerance is discussed in more detail in section 1 of the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology,  and the Logical Syntax more generally in the supplement  Logical Syntax of Language. The stated aim of the book is to show that logic is syntactical, i.e., that it consists in formal theories of linguistic symbols—a theory is “formal”, Carnap says (LSS [1937: 1]) when no reference is made in it to either the meaning of the symbols (e.g., the words) or to the sense of the expressions (e.g., the sentences), but simply and solely to the kinds and order of the symbols from which the expressions are constructed. The idea had of course been suggested by Hilbert’s “method of bifurcation [Methode der Zweiteilung]” as Carnap had called it, distinguishing a meta-mathematics with concrete meaning, on the one hand, from mathematics proper, on the other, which was to be regarded as purely formal, and the formal properties of which (e.g., consistency) Hilbert had aimed to study and prove in meta-mathematics—a method which Carnap sought to extend from mathematics to the whole of knowledge. The “chief motivation for my development of the syntactical method”, Carnap later wrote, was this: In our discussions in the Vienna Circle it had turned out that any attempt at formulating more precisely the philosophical problems in which we were interested ended up with problems of the logical analysis of language. Since in our view the issue in philosophical problems concerned the language, not the world, these problems should be formulated, not in the object language, but in the metalanguage. Therefore it seemed to me that the development of a suitable metalanguage would essentially contribute toward greater clarity in the formulation of philosophical problems and greater fruitfulness in their discussions. (Carnap 1963a: 55) That the main concepts of deductive logic (“e.g., provability, derivability from given premises, logical independence, etc”.) are purely syntactical was argued primarily by showing how they could be defined in two exemplary languages without reference to the meanings of any terms. Language I is a form of primitive recursive arithmetic, and was intended to exemplify a constructivist kind of language, while Language II contains classical mathematics. (In modern terminology, both of these “languages” are really theories.) Of the book’s five parts, the first three are taken up with the development of these two languages. In part IV, Carnap goes beyond the treatment of specific languages to sketch a template for “general syntax”; he tries to give a framework for the syntactical development or description of any language whatever. He abstracts from the syntactical categories of the particular language under consideration, and does not even assume he is given its set of variables, the distinction between its logical and descriptive vocabulary, its negation symbol, or any other syntactic property. Instead, all these sets and concepts are to be defined solely from the transformation (inference) rules of the language (see §46–47); Carnap is developing here what we would now call a version of “proof-theoretic semantics” or “logical inferentialism” (see the supplement  Logical Syntax of Language  for further details). Throughout all parts of the Logical Syntax, Carnap distinguishes between the “d-terms” specifiable this way (derivable, proof, demonstrable, refutable, decidable) from the “c-terms” (consequence, valid, contravalid, determinate, incompatible, content, synonymous). Though both are considered to be “syntactic” terms by Carnap, the c-terms seem closer to what we would now call “semantic”. This raises the question, for the modern reader, what Carnap actually means by “syntactic” (or “formal”) here; and it turns out (as Carnap himself later recognized) that “syntax” includes much of what he would later call “semantics”. Indeed we find (Wagner 2009: 22) that languages I and II are not actually “formal” in our sense at all; they are interpreted languages. While the syntactic method, as Carnap here conceives of it, requires that the interpretations be disregarded, a particular fixed interpretation implicitly remains in place. Carnap often refers to the import of some syntactic result or attribute “in material interpretation [bei inhaltlicher Deutung]” (e.g., LSS: 30), and the material interpretation sometimes slips in to play a role in the argument. Accordingly, Tarski (1936 [2002]: §2) characterizes Carnap’s definition of consequence for Language II in the Logical Syntax as semantic, acknowledges that “The first attempt at the formulation of a precise definition for the proper concept of following comes from R. Carnap” (in the Logical Syntax), and regards his own model-theoretic definition of logical consequence as essentially equivalent to Carnap’s (though applicable to a broader range of formalized languages than just to Language-II-like languages; see the supplement  Logical Syntax of Language).  This character of the Logical Syntax as a transitional work between syntax and semantics raises many subtle interpretative and historical issues that require distillation of the actual argument from the (often newly-invented) terminology in which it is embedded. Fortunately, Pierre Wagner’s (2009) excellent handbook on the Logical Syntax provides the reader with a guide. For all the technical apparatus, Carnap later acknowledged that “the investigation of philosophical problems was originally the main reason for the development of syntax” (Carnap 1963a: 55), and the final Part V of the book is devoted to these. The focus, however, is on the “syntax” idea itself, not on the other main idea, the principle of tolerance. There is a simple reason for this: Part V was almost entirely written before Carnap arrived at the principle of tolerance in late 1932, and when the book went to the publisher it had to be cut (the definition of “analyticity” for Language II (§ 34d), for instance, was not even included in the original book, only in the 1937 English translation). And Part V is devoted to a sustained argument for sticking to the “formal mode of speech” and avoiding the “material mode of speech” unless it is translatable into the formal mode. So it is hardly surprising that philosophers (see for instance Woleński 2003) took this to be the book’s main philosophical point and thought Carnap had left it behind after the embrace of semantics in 1935. Much of the recent discussion surrounding the Syntax, especially the principle of tolerance, was inspired by Gödel’s critique of Carnap, unpublished until 1995, that was originally intended for the Schilpp (1963) volume on Carnap in the Library of Living Philosophers. Gödel withdrew his paper, but six successive drafts of it were found in his Nachlass, of which several have now been published (Gödel 1995). It appears, from its title (“Is Mathematics Syntax of Language?”) and much of the exposition, to focus specifically on the “syntax” thesis, or more generally on the “linguistic” accounts of the foundations of mathematics deriving from Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (Goldfarb 1995: 325). However, Gödel himself understood that Carnap had meanwhile left behind that view (in its Logical Syntax form), and recent commentary has focused on the principle of tolerance (see section 1 of the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology  for the details of Gödel’s criticism). Carnap’s early-1930s syntactical method of avoiding reference for terms in the philosophical metalanguage has recently been identified as the first self-consciously worked-out program of what is now often called “inferentialism” (Peregrin forthcoming), a different form of which is especially championed by Robert Brandom (1994, 2000), and has been found attractive by others (e.g., Price 2013). Though Carnap’s inferentialism had different motivations from Brandom’s program of “reference explained away” (Brandom 1984), there is clearly at least an analogous strategy at work. While Carnap himself left the syntax program in its original form behind when he went on to incorporate semantics into his overall program for scientific languages, the syntax episode with its explicitly inferentialist agenda is now viewed by some (e.g., Chalmers 2012, Peregrin forthcoming) an important innovation in its own right. Some of these commentators thus regard Carnap’s later embrace of semantics as a step backwards. That had also been the view of Neurath at the time (Uebel 2007, Mormann 1999, Carus 2019), and of Quine and others later (e.g., Goldfarb & Ricketts 1992; Ricketts 1996; Goldfarb 1997). These criticisms are at least partly due to a perception that Carnap returned to a substantive conception of meaning such as the Wittgensteinian one he had dropped in 1931, but actually his conception of reference and meaning remained minimalist and schematic, much to the frustration of, e.g., Russell (1940; see Pincock 2007), who sought a substantive account of the intrinsic nature of reference (see the supplement  Semantics  for further discussion).