 Carnap had moved to Prague in late 1931, where he became a full professor at the German University, and wrote both drafts of the Logical Syntax of Language. The published book had tried to fuse the three major ideas of 1931–2. First, in January 1931, had come the rejection of Wittgenstein’s picture theory of meaning and its replacement by Hilbert’s sharp distinction between a language (a calculus, a purely formal symbol system) and its interpretation, with the requirement that a language be entirely specified by explicit rules. Closely bound up with this was the second idea, the insistence on the “formal mode of speech” and the avoidance of talk of meaning in the metalanguage. And third, late in 1932, had come the principle of tolerance: no language is definitive or “correct”, there is no logical “reality” for a language to “correspond to”. But within a year of the book’s publication, the second idea had been dropped; Carnap incorporated Tarski’s new semantical accounts of designation and truth, and extended his view of language accordingly. The first and third ideas, however, survived for the rest of Carnap’s career. What did not survive was the overreaction against “meaning” that accompanied the original insight of January 1931—the exclusive emphasis on the “formal mode of speech” in meta-discourse. In distinguishing between a language and its interpretation, Carnap’s first response had been to restrict extra-linguistic interpretation to the object language (and there to one particular—physicalistic—interpretation) and dispense with it entirely in the “elucidatory” metalanguage. But this restriction was loosened when Tarski convinced him in 1935 that interpretation could be completely specified by explicit rules governing satisfaction, designation, and truth. By this time, the storm clouds gathering in Europe were obvious for all to see, and like many of the Vienna Circle, Carnap sought an appointment in North America. In 1936 he landed at the University of Chicago, where he would stay for nearly twenty years, longer than he spent anywhere else. While he felt personally and intellectually comfortable in the United States, his written prose was never as elegant or forceful in English as it had been in German, and his publications were mostly quite technical. The larger context of his philosophy was of course unknown to most colleagues and students, and remained obscure to the larger public. This decontextualization of logical empiricism was reinforced by political factors. As new immigrants, Carnap and his Vienna Circle friends felt vulnerable in the United States, and many of them, having previously supported socialist causes in Europe, were kept under observation by the FBI, including Carnap himself (Reisch 2005). It was thus in their interest to play down the larger significance of their philosophical preoccupations, and to pose as narrow specialists in technical subjects. Carnap’s first major publication in English, soon after his arrival in the United States, was “Testability and Meaning” (1936–37), discussed in  sections 1.5–6  above, the first in a series of attempts to explicate “empirical content” or “empirical reducibility” more loosely than the strict reducibility envisaged in the Aufbau. By the late 1930s, Carnap was willing to countenance a theoretical language whose primitive terms are not constructed bottom-up from observation sentences at all but entirely top-down, “floating in the air, so to speak” so that these basic theoretical terms can have “only an indirect interpretation, which is incomplete in a certain sense” (Carnap 1939: 65). With these steps, Carnap began his return to a consideration of the theoretical language, which he had left behind during the Vienna years. But his main focus, after “Testability and Meaning”, was the semantic framework itself. In the slim volume on Foundations of Logic and Mathematics for the Encyclopedia of Unified Science (1939), the tripartite classification of linguistic theory into syntax, semantics, and pragmatics was first laid out. A five-volume series of Studies in Semantics was projected, of which the first two volumes, Introduction to Semantics and Formalization of Logic were published in 1942–3. Carnap then pursued a long-standing interest in modal logic and intensional languages, and published “Modalities and Quantification” in 1946, Meaning and Necessity in 1947. More details on Carnap’s work in semantics can be found in the supplement  Semantics. Carnap had embraced semantics in 1935 because Tarski had convinced him that designation and truth could be described and discussed in an entirely schematic and objective way, free from any psychological, subjective, or epistemological entanglements or commitments (Carnap 1936). As we have seen, the return to a schematic form of “meaning” led many to regard Logical Syntax as outdated. Carnap himself (e.g., 1942: §39) was careful to deny this, but probably didn’t emphasize enough that the return of “meaning” did not mean a return to an explanatory conception of meaning like Russell’s multiple relation theory of belief or Wittgenstein’s picture theory. This abstract and schematic approach to meaning disturbed many empiricists, giving them the impression that Carnap had no interest in what actually underlay meaning, i.e., wherein the relation between predicate and property (cf. Wilson 1982) actually consists. As B. Russell (1940: 314) complained, for instance, Carnap ignored “certain prior questions to be considered” before “the relation of empirical knowledge to non-linguistic occurrences” could be “properly understood”. But these “prior questions” were just the ones Carnap had put aside in 1931 (Pincock 2007). In this respect there is a seamless continuity in Carnap’s “minimalism” with respect to language; even with the embrace of semantics in 1935, these questions remained absent, and only began to make a rather shadowy reappearance with Carnap’s (1939) addition of pragmatics (the study of language in use) to his conception of language. Semantics abstracts from use and focuses only on the expressions themselves and their designata, while syntax abstracts from designata as well (1939: 3–4; 1942: 9). In Carnap’s work after 1935, it is important to distinguish between two different parts of the semantic enterprise. On the one hand, there are the repeated attempts to pin down the inferential relations between observation-statements and more general ones within the general framework of semantics. In this work, meaning and reference are considered particularly as they concern the empirical content (or meaning) of general statements, whether empirical generalizations or theories of more universal scope. This includes “Testability and Meaning” (Carnap 1936–37), the later work on the theoretical language (Carnap 1956a, 1959a), and much of the work on inductive logic (see  section 8  below). On the other hand, there is the construction of the semantic framework itself, its logical delineation and development; even if this was in principle to serve the first purpose, it became in effect a distinct project. This includes the Studies in Semantics, the modal logic systems (Carnap 1946), and the later version of his logic textbook, Einführung in die symbolische Logik (Carnap 1968b). We discuss this second component in  section 6.2,  immediately following, and the first component in  section 8  below. There are two main changes leading from the linguistic frameworks of the Logical Syntax to the “semantic systems” of Meaning and Necessity: Carnap took the semantic turn, allowing for a relation of reference or designation; and beyond that he allowed for intensional operators which he supplied with a new intensional semantics. From Foundations of Logic and Mathematics (1939) (and Introduction to Semantics, 1942) Carnap had taken up Tarski’s conception of semantic truth. The principle of tolerance in the Logical Syntax remained intact, but in the following refined form: the syntactic rules of formation can be chosen freely; if the syntactical rules of transformation (derivation, inference) are determined prior to the semantic rules, they may be determined freely as well, but the semantic rules will have to be selected such that the transformation rules are sound with respect to them; vice versa, if the semantic rules are chosen prior to the transformation rules, the former may be determined freely, in which case the latter will need to match the former by being sound with respect to them (see, e.g., section 12 of Carnap 1939). Completely new questions arose, e.g., whether the rules of inference of classical propositional logic would determine the semantics of the standard logical connectives uniquely (given certain constraints): this novel type of categoricity question was answered in the negative by Carnap (1943). (In recent years, this part of Carnap’s work has sparked a lively debate: see, e.g., Raatikainen 2008, Murzi & Hjortland 2009.) Semantics became just as important in Carnap’s work for the construction of formal languages as syntax had been in the Logical Syntax. Secondly, Carnap extended Tarski’s extensional semantics by a new intensional one, in which the truth values of sentences with operators creating intensional contexts (such as a sentential operator for necessity) can also be determined compositionally. Carnap’s invention of what would become “possible worlds semantics,” which he showed one could spell out in an extensional metalanguage, had a decisive influence on the development of modal logic and intensional semantics. Even though there are significant differences between modern “Kripke semantics” (which is rightly associated with Saul Kripke’s work), Carnap’s intensional semantics is still a possible worlds semantics in the sense that it evaluates formulas at possible worlds (“state-descriptions” in Carnap’s terminology), and the semantic rule for Carnap’s operator ‘N’ for (logical) necessity invokes universal quantification over worlds: \(N(A)\) holds in state-description s if and only if A holds in every state-description (see §41 of Meaning and Necessity; the differences and similarities to Kripke semantics are explained in detail in the supplement  Semantics (Section 1)).  On the side of theoretical linguistics, Richard Montague’s later intensional semantics for natural language built on Carnap’s semantics (see Partee 2011). As discussed in the supplement  Semantics (Section 2),  he partially weakened his early radical thesis of extensionality by the time of Meaning and Necessity. The languages to which Tarski’s semantics applied were extensional; Carnap’s semantics extends Tarski’s by assigning compositionally to each singular term, each predicate, and each sentence both an intension and an extension. The intension of an expression explicates what we understand when we understand it, and Carnap’s treatment of this is again “minimalist” in the sense that nothing subjective or psychological is involved; “understanding” is entirely schematic, i.e., determined solely by semantic rules. The extension of an expression at a state-description is determined by applying the semantic rules (or the expression’s intension) to the state-description. In the words of David Lewis (1970: 23): The plan to construe intensions as extension-determining functions originated with Carnap… Accordingly, let us call such functions Carnapian intensions. A state-description (an idea that derives from the “Spielräume” in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, and more distantly from Leibniz’s idea of possible worlds) is simply a set X of sentences for which the following is the case: for each atomic sentence in the object language, either the sentence or its negation is a member of X, but not both; and X only includes atomic sentences or negations of atomic sentences. One state-description describes the “actual state of the universe” (Carnap 1947: §2), and how a linguistic expression is evaluated at that state-description recovers the Tarskian extension of the expression. Intensions are assigned to linguistic expressions by evaluating them at arbitrary state-descriptions. According to Carnap’s setup, two sentences A and B have the same intension if and only if the equivalence \(A \leftrightarrow B\) is L-true. A sentence is L-true (logically true) just in case it holds in in every state-description. For Carnap this definition of L-truth explicates the informal idea that a sentence is logically true if it is true in virtue of semantic rules alone without reference to empirical facts. Later, Carnap introduced the idea of “meaning postulates” that could restrict the range of state-descriptions (Carnap 1952) and adopted Quine’s terminology by which only those sentences are “logically true” whose truth is evident from the logical particles alone, while the larger class of sentences true in all state-descriptions are called “analytic”. Carnap (1946, 1947) worked out an intensional semantics for necessity and possibility operators for different example languages, and for the modal logic S5 that C.I. Lewis (1944) had previously discussed (see the supplement  Semantics (Section 1)  for the details). He also started exploring areas that are presently of special interest, such as “hyperintensional” semantics (see, e.g., Yablo 2014): In the context of addressing the paradox of analysis, he found that a stronger or finer-grained notion of synonymy was needed than identity of intension, i.e., L-equivalence, and he defined a relation called “intensionally isomorphic to” for that purpose. In response to critiques by Benson Mates and Leonard Linsky (1949), who pointed out instances of apparent synonymity that were not intensionally isomorphic by Carnap’s definition, Carnap replied that this just showed that the ordinary-language conception of “synonymity” is vague, and that actually it conceals a number, perhaps a range, of explicanda; for certain purposes, he agreed, a still stronger (or finer-grained) conception of intensionality (and thus synonymity) might be required (Carnap 1949). Alonzo Church used Carnap’s concept of intensional isomorphism in his reconstruction of Frege’s notions of sense and reference, “A formulation of the logic of sense and denotation” (Church 1951), and later also addressed a critique to Carnap directly (Church 1954), to which Carnap (1954b) replied. John Myhill (1958) in a critique of Church’s reconstruction, re-discovered a paradox first spelled out by Russell in Appendix B of Principles that raises precisely the same issue about individuating intensions, and since then the study of Russellian intensional logic, and finer-grained versions of intensional identity, has continued (Church 1976, 1985; Linsky 1988; Anderson 1989; Cantini 2004; Deutsch 2014). Carnap argues in Meaning and Necessity (especially §30) that his method of extension and intension is an improvement over Frege’s method of reference and sense, because it preserves the extension and intension of a linguistic expression across contexts (i.e., regardless of whether they are extensional or intensional contexts), while Frege’s method does not. Before Michael Dummett’s work on Frege, Carnap’s detailed critical engagement with Frege’s theory of sense and reference in this book probably did more to establish Frege as a classic of analytic philosophy than any other single impulse. Not only Church, but many others were inspired not only to reconstruct Frege’s original view in a more rigorous way, but to do so in the light of Carnap’s challenge and his critique of those views from a modern point of view. Carnap’s intensional semantics is discussed in more detail in the supplement  Semantics (Section 1).