 In 1951, Herbert Feigl approached Paul Schilpp, the editor of the Library of Living Philosophers, about doing a volume not on a particular philosopher, but on logical empiricism as a movement. Carnap and Reichenbach were to be in the foreground, as representative figures for the movement as a whole. Schilpp was sufficiently interested that he persisted with the idea even after Reichenbach’s sudden death in 1953; the volume was now to be focused on Carnap alone. Carnap invested a great deal of time in the project. He took the task of writing an autobiography seriously, reviewing many of his old papers, including his extensive diaries, in preparation for it. The resulting autobiography was much too long, and had to be cut by a third before publication. (The cut portions are available at the Young Research Library, University of California at Los Angeles, Special Collections, Collection 1029 (Rudolf Carnap), Box 2, CM3, mostly in folder marked “M-A5”; extensive quotations and references can be found in Carus 2007a.) Unfortunately, publication was delayed by a series of mishaps, and when the book finally appeared in 1963, logical empiricism was no longer at the forefront of interest. Analytic philosophers had largely been swayed by Quine’s critique of Carnap over the past decade, and philosophers of science were captivated by Thomas Kuhn’s book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, published the year before in the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, co-edited by Carnap. Logical empiricism no longer inspired passions, either for or against; it seemed to belong to the past. Carnap saw in the anti-war and student movements of the 1960s an American version of the Youth Movement that had played such an important role in his own development half a century earlier, but insofar as the students of the 1960s were interested in philosophy, it was not in logical empiricism. A few weeks before his death, Carnap prepared a report for an American Philosophical Association committee about his meeting in the summer of 1970 with some philosophers imprisoned in Mexico. It illustrates his continued interest in social and political matters and in his fellow philosophers, and appeared posthumously, in December of that year, in the Journal of Philosophy. When Carnap died in Los Angeles in 1970, the philosophical world at large (as opposed to the major figures whose views he had shaped, such as Quine, Goodman, Putnam, Jeffrey, or Stein) had lost interest in him. But half a century later, it is fair to say that Carnap’s work is as much in the foreground of philosophical discussion as it has ever been.