 The criterion of expected utility had another advantage for Russell. It allowed him to recommend a less “conservative and anti-reforming” version of Moore's principle that “the individual can be confidently recommended … to conform to rules which are generally useful and generally practiced.” Russell was an act-consequentialist rather than a rule-consequentialist. An act is right if the expected consequences of performing it are as good or better than any other. It is not right because it conforms to some rule, even a rule that it is generally useful to obey. Nevertheless, rules are necessary because we do not have world enough and time to calculate the consequences of every act. I think that, speaking philosophically, all acts ought to be judged by their effects; but as this is difficult and uncertain and takes time, it is desirable, in practice, that some kinds of acts should be condemned and others praised without waiting to investigate consequences. I should say, therefore, with the utilitarians, that the right act, in any given circumstances, is that which, on the data, will probably produce the greatest balance of good over evil of all the acts that are possible; but that the performance of such acts may be promoted by the existence of a moral code. (RoE: 216/Power: 168) Thus Russell believed that it is generally right to obey “generally useful” rules, though these are “rules of thumb” and there may be circumstances in which it is right (that is obligatory) to break them. Even the best moral rules, however, will have some exceptions, since no class of actions always has bad [or good!] results. (RoE: 137/Religion and Science: 227–8) But though Russell thought it is generally right to obey generally useful rules, he also thought that many of the rules that are “generally practiced” are not “generally useful”. Sometimes they derive from bygone superstitions and sometimes they foster the interests of the powerful at other peoples expense. Primitive ethics …select certain modes of behavior for censure [or praise] for reasons which are lost in anthropological obscurity. (Education and the Social Order: 23) However, one of the purposes—usually in large part unconscious—of a traditional morality is to make the existing social system work. It achieves this purpose, when it is successful, both more cheaply and more effectively than a police force does … The most obvious example … is the inculcation of obedience. It is (or rather was) the duty of children to submit to parents, wives to husbands, servants to masters, subjects to princes, and (in religious matters) laymen to priests. (RoE: 207/Power: 157) Thus Russell was inclined to agree with Plato's Thrasymachus, at least to the extent that what passes for justice is often [to] the advantage of the stronger [that is the ruling caste, class or gender]. Russell was opposed both to power-moralities (codes designed to bolster the interests of exploitative elites) and to the senseless and often pernicious remnants of defunct superstitions. An ethic not derived from superstition must decide first upon the kind of social effects which it desires to achieve and the social effects which it desires to avoid. It must then decide, as far as knowledge permits, what acts will promote the desired consequences: these acts it will praise, while those acts having a contrary tendency it will condemn. (Education and the Social Order: 73) It was Russell's mission as a practical moralist, a social reformer and a popular sage to promote a humane and non-superstitious ethic. This was partly a matter of preaching and partly a matter of argument: preaching as regards ends and argument as regards means. In the latter, and more preachy, part of his career, it was Russell's dominant view that judgments about what things are good or bad as ends do not have a truth-value. To say that it is a good thing “that the individual, like Leibniz's monads should mirror the world” (Education and the Social Order: 10) is to say something like “Would that everyone desired that the individual, like one of Leibniz's monads, should mirror the world!” Since this is neither true nor false, it cannot be rationally argued for. The best we can do is to remove objections and present the end in a favorable light. Russell was perfectly clear about this. Why [should the individual mirror the world]? I cannot say why, except that knowledge and comprehensiveness appear to me glorious attributes in virtue of which I prefer Newton to an oyster. The man who holds concentrated within his own mind, as within a camera obscura, the depths of space, the evolution of the sun and its planets, the geological ages of the earth, and the brief history of humanity, appears to me to be doing what is distinctively human and what adds most to the diversified spectacle of nature. This is eloquent stuff (and too me, at least, convincing) but it hardly constitutes an argument. And this Russell freely admitted. Ultimate values are not matters as to which argument is possible. If a man maintains that misery is desirable and that it would be a good thing if everybody always had a violent toothache, we may disagree with him, and we may laugh at him if we catch him going to the dentist, but we cannot prove that he is mistaken as we could if he said that iron is lighter than water … As to ultimate values, men may agree or disagree, they may fight with guns or with ballot papers but they cannot reason logically. (Education and the Social Order: 136) This is rather disconcerting, especially if we replace the comic examples that Russell employs in Education and the Social Order (he imagines a prophet “who advance[s] the theory that happiness should be confined to those whose first names begin with Z”) with the real-life moral elitists and chauvinists that he discusses in other works of the 1930s and 1940s. Nietzsche and the Nazis really did believe that the sufferings of some people were not significant evils (herd-men in the case of Nietzsche, Jews, Slavs and Gypsies in the case of the Nazis) and it was Russell's thesis that no rational argument could be advanced against them. Let us consider two theories as to the good. One says, like Christianity, Kant, and democracy: whatever the good may be, any one man's enjoyment of it has the same value as any other man's. The other says: there is a certain sub-class of mankind—white men, Germans, gentiles, or what not—whose good or evil alone counts in an estimation of ends; other men are only to be considered as means … When [irrelevant] arguments are swept away, there remains, so far as I can see, nothing to be said except for each party to express moral disapproval of the other. Those who reject this conclusion advance no argument against it except that it is unpleasant. (“Reply to Criticisms” RoE: 146–147/Papers 11: 48–49) But unpleasant as this conclusion may be, it does not imply that  those with a humane and egalitarian conception of the good should  give up preaching on its behalf. On the contrary, such preaching  becomes imperative, especially for those with rhetorical gifts. Which  is why Russell devoted so much time and effort to this  activity. According to me, the person who judges that A is good is wishing others to feel certain desires. He will therefore, if not hindered by other activities, try to rouse these desires in other people if he thinks he knows how to do so. This is the purpose of preaching, and it was my purpose in the various books in which I have expressed ethical opinions. The art of presenting one's desires persuasively is totally different from that of logical demonstration, but it is equally legitimate. (“Reply to Criticisms” RoE: 149/Papers 11: 51 Persuasion as regards ends may be a non-rational process, but that does not mean that it is irrational, let alone wrong, to engage in it. When it comes to means however, rational argument becomes a genuine possibility. It might seem otherwise since judgments about what is right or what ought to be done—which for Russell are essentially concerned with means—would appear to be as incapable of truth as judgments about what is good and bad. In Russell's view, “the right act, in any given circumstances, is that which, on the data, will probably produce the greatest balance of good over evil” and the right rule or policy is likewise the one that can be expected to produce the best effects. That is, “X is right” is assertible (roughly, a sensible thing to say) when X can be expected to lead to the best results. But if “Y is good”, is really in the optative mood, amounting to the exclamation “Would that everyone desired Y!”, then “X is right” would appear to be optative too, since it comes down to something like “X leads to more of what [would that everyone desired!]”. Here, the clause in square brackets, which is obviously in the optative mood, infects the entire sentence with its optative character. “X leads to more of what [would that everyone desired!]”, in so far as it can be made sense of, does not seem to be the kind of thing that could be true or false. However, Russell believed that judgments about what is right or what ought to be done can be given an analysis which gives them a sort of ersatz objectivity and hence the possibility of truth. If Dmitri has a reasonably determinate conception of the good, that is, a coherent set of opinions about which things are good and which bad, then although Dmitri's opinions themselves are neither true nor false—since, despite appearances they are not really opinions at all but optative expressions of Dmitri's desires—it can nevertheless be true or false that X is good in Dmitri's opinion, that is, good-according-to-Dmitri. “Oh to be in England, now that April's here!” is neither true nor false, but if I say it sincerely, it will in fact be true that I desire to be in England.  Similarly, if Dmitri says that “Bungy-jumping is good” what he says won't be true, since really it is in the optative mood, but if he says it sincerely, it will be true that Bungy-jumping is good-in-Dmitri's-opinion, or good-according-to-Dmitri. Thus although there are no facts of the matter about which things are good or bad, there are facts of the matter about which things are believed by this or that person to be good or bad. Furthermore—and this is the crucial point—there are facts of the matter about whether a given action or a given policy is likely to promote what somebody-or-other believes to be good. Since Hitler believed that victory over Britain would be good, there was a fact of the matter about whether bombing London as opposed to bombing the RAF's airfields would be likely bring about the states of affairs that he desired. As it turned out, the policy he pursued did not produce results that were best-according-to-Hitler. Hence if Hitler had adopted a consequentialist reading of “ought”, and had indexed it to his own requirements, “I ought to bomb London” (as said by Hitler) would have been false. And its truth or its falsehood would have been a factually arguable question. Now, suppose we define the right act with respect to B, not as “that which, on the data, will probably produce the greatest balance of good over evil” but as “that which, on the data, will probably produce the greatest balance of what B believes to be good over what B believes to be evil”. The right rule of policy with respect to B will correspondingly be defined as the rule or policy that will probably, in the appropriate circumstances, produce the greatest balance of what B believes to be good over what B believes to be evil. Then, so long as B has a reasonably coherent set of ideals, the claim that a given act or policy is right or wrong with respect to B will usually have a determinate truth-value.  Claims of the form “X is right wrt to B” will be either true or false, so long as the person (or group of persons) designated by B has a clear and consistent set of values. There will thus be a fact of the matter about whether X is right wrt to B which can be the subject of rational enquiry. And if “B” stands in for us (whoever “we” may be) and if we share a reasonably coherent set of ideals, then there will be a fact of the matter about whether X is right or wrong with respect to our ideals. Thus if there is agreement with respect to ideals and if we adopt a consequentialist conception of rightness, indexed, not to what is good, but to what we believe to be good, then we can have a rational debate—maybe even a scientific enquiry—about the rights and wrongs of actions, rules or policies, or at least about their rightness or wrongness with respect to us. The framing of moral rules, so long as the ultimate Good is supposed known, [Russell should have said ‘supposed agreed’] is a matter for science. For example: should capital punishment be inflicted for theft, or only for murder, or not at all? Jeremy Bentham, who considered pleasure to be the Good, devoted himself to working out what criminal code would most promote pleasure, and concluded that it ought to be much less severe than that prevailing in his day. All this, except the proposition that pleasure is the Good, comes within the sphere of science. (RoE: 137–138/Religion and Science: 228–229) Once the ends have been agreed, we can have a rational debate about the code most likely to promote those ends. In some cases, such questions can be resolved by scientific enquiry, or at any rate by statistics. But (with one or two exceptions) rational argument is only really possible when we take the ends as read and confine our attention to the means. We are now in a position to understand Russell's general strategy as a polemicist for moral reform and its relation to his emotivist meta-ethic.