 “We called him ‘old Sidg’ and regarded him as merely out of date” (My Philosophical Development: 30). So said Russell of his teacher, the great Victorian moral philosopher, Henry Sidgwick (though he later thought that he and his contemporaries “did not give [Sidgwick] nearly as much respect as he deserved”). But though Russell may have regarded Sidgwick as an old fogey, he set the agenda for a lot of Russell's work on ethics in the 1890s. For Russell was much exercised by a problem that also bothered Sidgwick: the Dualism of Practical Reason (see Sidgwick 1907: 496–516; see also Schulz 2004: ch. 4, in which it becomes abundantly clear how very preoccupied Sidgwick was with this problem). According to Sidgwick, it is rational to do what is morally right (by maximizing pleasurable consciousness on the part of all sentient beings) and rational to do what is prudentially right (by maximizing pleasurable consciousness on the part of oneself), but, when the two come into conflict, the one does not seem to be any more rational than the other. If God exists, then He can ensure that it will pay in the long term to promote the public interest, by rewarding the righteous in the life to come. What is morally right will coincide with what is prudentially right, and that, consequently, is what Practical Reason will command. But if, as Sidgwick was reluctantly inclined to think, there is no God, what is morally right and what is prudentially right will sometimes come apart, and Practical Reason will speak with a divided voice. If it does not always pay to be good, then it is not clear that is more rational to be good than to be bad, a conclusion that Sidgwick found deeply disturbing. The rather priggish young Russell was bothered by the problem too (a solution, he said, would be “a real solid addition to my happiness”) because, like Sidgwick, he did not believe in God. But as a fashionable young philosopher of the 1890s he did believe in something that he thought would do nearly as well, namely, the Absolute. For at this time, Russell, like most of his philosophical contemporaries in the English-speaking world, was a neo-Hegelian or Absolute Idealist. Though we may seem to be living in a material world and to be material boys and girls, this is an Appearance only. Reality, the Absolute, is basically mental, a sort of timeless and harmonious group mind of which our separate selves are (perhaps delusory) aspects. As Bradley put it, the Absolute is one system, and … its contents are nothing but sentient experience. It will hence be a single and all-inclusive experience, which embraces every partial diversity in concord. For it cannot be less than appearance, and hence no feeling or thought, of any kind, can fall outside its limits. (1930 [1893]: 129) (We stress that it is hard to present this doctrine concisely without gross caricature.) But there was a crucial difference between McTaggart and Bradley, the two leading idealists of Russell's day. McTaggart believed in personal immortality and claimed the harmony that already exists timelessly (so to speak) “must some day become explicit” (McTaggart 1996 [1893]: 210–211). Bradley did not. At first Russell was an adherent of McTaggart. This afforded him a neat solution to Sidgwick's problem. The happy day when the harmony becomes explicit can be promoted or retarded by human action. If I benefit myself at your expense not only am I doing down a self with whom I am, in Reality, intimately linked—I am putting off the day when the harmony that Really Is becomes apparent. And since this harmony will be supremely pleasurable I am harming myself into the bargain. Hence morality and self-interest coincide and Practical Reason is reunited with itself (see Russell, 1893, “On the Foundations of Ethics”, RoE: 37–40/Papers 1: 206–211). This illustrates the point made by a number of unkind critics, that in the late 19th century Absolute Idealism functioned as a sort of methadone program for high-minded Victorian intellectuals, providing them with moral uplift as they struggled to get off the hard stuff of official Christianity (see Stove 1991: chs. 5 & 6; Allard 2003 and, in more restrained language, Griffin 2003b: pp. 85–88). Before long however, Russell moved over to Bradley's camp and ceased to believe that the timelessly existing harmony would become manifest in time. Nevertheless, since we are all aspects of the Absolute, a sort of timeless super-self, there is essentially the same objection to indulging my desires at your expense as there is to indulging one of my own passions at the expense of others which are inconsistent with it. I am hurting, if not myself, at least a larger whole of which we are both parts (Russell, 1894, “Cleopatra or Maggie Tulliver”, RoE: 57–67/Papers I: 92–8). But before long even this solution ceased to satisfy. In a paper not published until 1957, “Seems Madam? Nay It Is”, Russell argued (as he put it to Moore) that “for all purposes that are not purely intellectual, the world of Appearance is the real world”. In particular, the hypothesis that there is a timeless and harmonious Reality provides no consolation for our present pains since it is a Reality that we never get to experience. If “the world of daily life remains wholly unaffected by [Reality], and goes on its way just as if there were no world of Reality at all”, and if this world of Reality is a world that we not only do not but cannot experience (since experience is necessarily temporal), how can its alleged existence afford us any consolation for what seems to be (and therefore is) evil in the world of Appearance?  (Russell, 1897, “Seems, Madam? Nay, It Is”, RoE: 79–86/Papers 1: 105–111/Why I am Not a Christian: 75–82). Now this argument has an interesting corollary which Russell does not explicitly draw. It may be that in Reality the pains I inflict on you affect me—or at least a larger mind-like thing in which we both participate—but if I never experience those effects, how can this give me a motive to do or forbear if my interests conflict with yours? How can the fact that you and I are in Reality one (or at least part of one) give me a reason to look out for you, if this oneness is something I never experience? If Absolute Idealism can provide no consolation for life's disasters—which is what Russell is explicitly arguing—then it seems that it cannot supply me with a reason not to visit those disasters on you, if doing so is likely to benefit me. It may be that I suffer in a metaphysical sort of way when I profit at your expence, but if this suffering is something I never feel (since I am effectively confined to the world of Appearance) why should this bother me? Thus the Dualism of Practical Reason reasserts itself. Sometimes what is morally right is at odds with what is prudentially right and when it is, there seems no reason to prefer the one to the other. Whether Russell realized this is not entirely clear. What is clear is that “Seems, Madam? Nay, It Is” marks the beginning of the end for Russell's Absolute Idealism. Once he realized that for all purposes that are not purely intellectual [including perhaps the purpose of providing moral uplift] the world of Appearance is the real world, Russell came to feel that the world of Reality was no use for purely intellectual purposes either and soon resolved to do without it. A big “R” Reality, that could neither console us for life's troubles nor reconcile Duty and Interest, was a big “R” Reality that might as well not exist. The methadone of Absolute Idealism having failed, Russell was forced to accept appearances at face value. But what about the problem of the Dualism of Practical Reason? In later life, Russell ceased to worry about it perhaps because he realized that it is a problem that cannot be resolved. The Cosmos of Duty really is a Chaos (as Sidgwick rather colorfully put it). Duty and Interest can come into conflict, and when they do, there is no decisive reason for preferring the one to the other. All you can do is to try to instill moral and altruistic motivations, which is what Russell tried to do with his children. But when they asked why they should care about other people (as his daughter Kate defiantly did) his response was rather lame. This isn't much of an answer, but since the Cosmos of Duty really is a Chaos, it was perhaps the best that Russell could do.