 The role of simplicity as a theoretical virtue seems so widespread, fundamental, and implicit that many philosophers, scientists, and theologians have sought a justification for principles such as Occam's Razor on similarly broad and basic grounds. This rationalist approach is connected to the view that making a priori simplicity assumptions is the only way to get around the underdetermination of theory by data. Until the second half of the 20th Century this was probably the predominant approach to the issue of simplicity. More recently, the rise of empiricism within analytic philosophy led many philosophers to argue disparagingly that a priori justifications keep simplicity in the realm of metaphysics (see Zellner et al. 2001, p.1). Despite its changing fortunes, the rationalist approach to simplicity still has its adherents. For example, Richard Swinburne writes: (i) Theological Justifications The post-medieval period coincided with a gradual transition from theology to science as the predominant means of revealing the workings of nature. In many cases, espoused principles of parsimony continued to wear their theological origins on their sleeves, as with Leibniz's thesis that God has created the best and most complete of all possible worlds, and his linking of this thesis to simplifying principles such as light always taking the (time-wise) shortest path. A similar attitude—and rhetoric—is shared by scientists through the early modern and modern period, including Kepler, Newton, and Maxwell. Some of this rhetoric has survived to the present day, especially among theoretical physicists and cosmologists such as Einstein and  Hawking.[10]  Yet there are clear dangers with relying on a theological justification of simplicity principles. Firstly, many—probably most—contemporary scientists are reluctant to link methodological principles to religious belief in this way. Secondly, even those scientists who do talk of ‘God’ often turn out to be using the term metaphorically, and not necessarily as referring to the personal and intentional Being of monotheistic religions. Thirdly, even if there is a tendency to justify simplicity principles via some literal belief in the existence of God, such justification is only rational to the extent that rational arguments can be given for the existence of  God.[11] For these reasons, few philosophers today are content to rest with a theological justification of simplicity principles. Yet there is no doubting the influence such justifications have had on past and present attitudes to simplicity. As Smart (1994) writes: (ii) Metaphysical Justifications One approach to justifying simplicity principles is to embed such principles in some more general metaphysical framework. Perhaps the clearest historical example of systematic metaphysics of this sort is the work of Leibniz. The leading contemporary example of this approach—and in one sense a direct descendent of Leibniz's methodology—is the possible worlds framework of David Lewis. In one of his earlier works, Lewis writes, Lewis has been attacked for not saying more about what exactly he takes simplicity to be (see Woodward 2003). However, what is clear is that simplicity plays a key role in underpinning his metaphysical framework, and is also taken to be a prima facie theoretical virtue. Though Occam's Razor has arguably been a longstanding and important tool in the rise of analytic metaphysics, it has only been comparatively recently that there has been much debate among metaphysicians concerning the principle itself. Cameron (2010), Schaffer (2010), and Sider (2013) each argue for a version of Occam's Razor that focuses specifically on fundamental entities. Schaffer (2015, p. 647) dubs this version "The Laser" and formulates it as an injunction not to multiply fundamental entities beyond necessity, together with the implicit understanding that there is no such injunction against multiplying derivative entities. Baron and Tallant (forthcoming) attack 'razor-revisers' such as Schaffer, arguing that principles such as The Laser fail to mesh with actual patterns of theory-choice in science and are also not vindicated by some of the lines of justification for Occam's Razor. (iii) ‘Intrinsic Value’ Justifications Some philosophers have approached the issue of justifying simplicity principles by arguing that simplicity has intrinsic value as a theoretical goal. Sober, for example, writes: Such intrinsic value may be ‘primitive’ in some sense, or it may be analyzable as one aspect of some broader value. For those who favor the second approach, a popular candidate for this broader value is aesthetic. Derkse (1992) is a book-length development of this idea, and echoes can be found in Quine's remarks—in connection with his defense of Occam's Razor—concerning his taste for “clear skies” and “desert landscapes.” In general, forging a connection between aesthetic virtue and simplicity principles seems better suited to defending methodological rather than epistemic principles. (iv) Justifications via Principles of Rationality Another approach is to try to show how simplicity principles follow from other better established or better understood principles of  rationality.[12]  For example, some philosophers just stipulate that they will take ‘simplicity’ as shorthand for whatever package of theoretical virtues is (or ought to be) characteristic of rational inquiry. A more substantive alternative is to link simplicity to some particular theoretical goal, for example unification (see Friedman 1983). While this approach might work for elegance, it is less clear how it can be maintained for ontological parsimony. Conversely, a line of argument which seems better suited to defending parsimony than to defending elegance is to appeal to a principle of epistemological conservatism. Parsimony in a theory can be viewed as minimizing the number of ‘new’ kinds of entities and mechanisms which are postulated. This preference for old mechanisms may in turn be justified by a more general epistemological caution, or conservatism, which is characteristic of rational inquiry. Note that the above style of approach can be given both a rationalist and an empiricist gloss. If unification, or epistemological conservatism, are themselves a priori rational principles, then simplicity principles stand to inherit this feature if this approach can be carried out successfully. However, philosophers with empiricist sympathies may also pursue analysis of this sort, and then justify the base principles either inductively from past success or naturalistically from the fact that such principles are in fact used in science. To summarize, the main problem with a priori justifications of simplicity principles is that it can be difficult to distinguish between an a priori defense and no defense(!). Sometimes the theoretical virtue of simplicity is invoked as a primitive, self-evident proposition that cannot be further justified or elaborated upon. (One example is the beginning of Goodman and Quine's 1947 paper, where they state that their refusal to admit abstract objects into their ontology is “based on a philosophical intuition that cannot be justified by appeal to anything more ultimate.”) (Goodman & Quine 1947, p. 174). It is unclear where leverage for persuading skeptics of the validity of such principles can come from, especially if the grounds provided are not themselves to beg further questions. Misgivings of this sort have led to a shift away from justifications rooted in ‘first philosophy’ towards approaches which engage to a greater degree with the details of actual practice, both scientific and statistical. These other approaches will be discussed in the next two sections.