 Many contemporary philosophers take the canonical argument for Cartesian Skepticism to involve skeptical hypotheses and a Closure Principle  (CP).[5]  A skeptical hypothesis (with respect to a proposition p and a subject S) is a proposition SH such that if SH were true, then: (a) S would not know p, and (b) S would not be able to distinguish SH from a situation where S knows p. The evil demon scenario that Descartes envisions at the end of his “First Meditation” functions as a near-universal skeptical hypothesis, for the demon has the power to deceive any subject regarding almost any proposition. One way in which a SH may satisfy (a) is by describing a situation where p is false, but this is not the only way. Descartes’ evil demon may induce in a disembodied subject’s mind an experience as of the subject’s own hands in front of her, as a result of which the subject believes that there are hands in front of her, while at the same time dangling some unattached hands in front of the subject (we are waiving here difficulties having to do with how to locate objects relative to disembodied subjects). The subject’s belief that there are hands in front of her is in that case true, but she still doesn’t know it. The connection between Closure principles and arguments for skepticism gets complicated if we countenance skeptical hypotheses which do not entail the falsehood of the proposition in question, and so in what follows we limit our discussion to those that do. Letting “h” stand for any proposition about the external world we would ordinarily take ourselves to be justified in believing, for example, G. E. Moore’s famous “here’s a hand” (Moore 1939 [1993]), and re-using “SH” for a skeptical hypothesis relative to h (we leave the subject tacit), we can state the contemporary canonical CP-style argument for Cartesian Skepticism as follows: CP1 follows from the following Closure Principle (letting “Jx” stand for the subject is justified in believing x): Closure Principle [CP]: For all propositions x and y, if x entails y, and Jx, then Jy. (In the argument above, \(x = h\) and \(y = {\sim}SH\).) A crucial feature of CP is that it does not depend upon employing a stringent notion of justification. Suppose that (positive) justification comes in degrees, where the lowest degree is something like mere plausibility and the highest degree is absolute certainty. CP could be recast as follows: CP*: For all propositions, x and y, if x entails y, and Jx to degree u, then Jy to degree v (where \(u \le v)\). There appear to be only three ways that one can respond to the CP-style skeptical argument: deny at least one premise, deny that the argument is valid, or reluctantly accept the conclusion—if neither of the first two alternatives succeeds. Let us begin an examination of CP1 and the general closure principle, CP, of which CP1 is an instantiation. Closure certainly does hold for some properties, for example, truth. If p is true and implies q, then q is true. It just as clearly does not hold for other properties, for example being surprising. It might be surprising that Tomás is taller than his father, but it is certainly not surprising that Tomás is taller than someone, and yet the former entails the latter. What about justified belief? Does Closure hold for it? It might be thought that the answer must be a clear “No”, for the following reasons. First, notice that every logical truth is entailed by every proposition. If Closure held for justification, then we would have to say that everybody is justified in believing every logical truth (provided that we are willing to grant that everybody is justified in believing at least one proposition). But this doesn’t seem plausible. Some logical truths are too complicated to even parse, let alone be justified in believing. If this is true, then Closure doesn’t hold for belief (that is to say, we may fail to believe propositions entailed by propositions we already believe). The existence of very complicated logical truths also underlies another worry for Closure. For to every logical entailment between propositions there corresponds a logical truth: the (material) conditional with the entailing proposition in the antecedent and the entailed proposition in the consequent. Some of these logically true conditionals will be examples of propositions that we are not justified in believing (if only because the consequent is too complicated for beings like us to even parse). In that case, we might well be justified in believing their antecedents without being justified in believing their consequents. But it also appears that CP can easily be repaired. We can stipulate (i) that the domain of the propositions in the generalization of CP includes only contingent propositions that are within S’s capacity to grasp and (ii) that the entailment is “obvious” to S. The skeptic can agree to those restrictions because the skeptical scenarios are posited in such a way as to render it obvious that our ordinary beliefs are false in those scenarios, and it is taken to be a contingent claim that S is in the actual circumstances as described in the antecedent. (For a full discussion of the required repairs of CP, see David & Warfield 2008 and Hawthorne 2014.) There is one other important, required clarification of the restricted version of CP. “Justified belief” is ambiguous. It could be used to refer to a species of actually held beliefs—namely, those actually held beliefs of S that are justified. Or it could refer to propositions that S is justified in believing—regardless of whether S does indeed believe them. Following Roderick Firth, the distinction between actually held justified beliefs and propositions one is justified in believing, regardless of whether they are actually believed, is often marked by distinguishing between doxastic and propositional justification (see Firth 1978). If CP is to be acceptable, “justified in believing” in the consequent must be used so as to refer to propositional justification for a reason already cited, i.e., that Closure does not hold for belief. In other words, one of S’s actual beliefs, p, might be justified and S still fail to believe some proposition that is entailed by  p.[6] We are now in a position to ask: Does the restricted form of closure hold? There are at least three types of argument against closure in the literature: alleged counterexamples, alleged unpalatable consequences, and incompatibility with allegedly plausible epistemological theories. In the remainder of this section we examine one exemplar of each of these. Fred Dretske and others have produced cases in which they believe CP  fails.[7]  Dretske writes: …something’s being a zebra implies that it is not a mule…cleverly disguised by the zoo authorities to look like a zebra. Do you know that these animals are not mules cleverly disguised? If you are tempted to say “Yes” to this question, think a moment about what reasons you have, what evidence you can produce in favor of this claim. The evidence you had for thinking them zebras has been effectively neutralized, since it does not count toward their not being mules cleverly disguised to look like zebras. (Dretske 1970: 1015–1016) Dretske is speaking of knowledge rather than justified beliefs, but that seems irrelevant since the issue concerns the supposed lack of a sufficient source of evidence or reasons for the claim that the animal is not a cleverly disguised mule. The crucial thing to note about this proposed counterexample is that it works only if the Closure Principle entails that the very same source of evidence that justifies S in believing that the animals are zebras must justify S in believing that they are not cleverly disguised mules. Since the evidence for the former has been “effectively neutralized”, it is not available for the latter. Now, in response one could claim that once the question of whether the animals are disguised mules has been raised, the evidence is “effectively neutralized” for both the former and the latter, and S is no longer justified in believing that the animals are zebras. Thus, it could be held that this example could actually be used to support CP. Nevertheless, let us grant that the evidence for the claim that the animals are zebras cannot be used to show that they are not cleverly disguised mules. Still, it could be argued that this would not force giving up CP. Such an argument could begin by recalling that CP claimed merely that whenever a subject is justified in believing p, then that subject is justified in believing q. CP does not require that the subject have the same evidence for p as she does for q. Dretske’s purported counterexample seems to require that CP implies that the adequate source of evidence is the same for both propositions. No doubt this constraint sometimes correctly portrays the relevant evidential relationships when some proposition entails some other proposition. For example, suppose I have adequate evidence for the claim that Anne has two brothers. Then it would seem that the very same evidence would be adequate for believing that Anne has at least one brother. But the defender of CP, and more particularly the Cartesian Skeptic, could point out that closure does not require this to hold for every case. There are two other possibilities. First, one may hold that when p entails q and there is some evidence e for p, it is p itself that is evidence for q. For example, it may be held that given that I have adequate evidence for believing that 2 is a prime number, I can use that very proposition (that 2 is a prime number) as an adequate reason for believing that there is at least one even prime. (See Klein 1981, 1995, and 2000, but see below for reasons for doubting that this is a genuine possibility.) Second, there are cases where the order is reversed because q serves as part of the evidence for p. For example, suppose that I am justified, ceteris paribus, in believing that (pure) water is present if I am justified in believing that there is present, at standard temperature and pressure, a clear, odorless, watery-tasting and watery-looking fluid that contains hydrogen and oxygen. This pattern is typical of abductive inferences, and is often referred to as “inference to the best explanation”. (See Vogel 1990, 2014b for a discussion of Cartesian Skepticism and inference to the best explanation.) In addition, there are cases in which it seems that some contraries of h need to be eliminated prior to h’s being justified. For example, reconsidering the zebra-in-the-zoo case, it seems to be true that if I had some good reason to think that the animals are cleverly disguised mules, such a contrary would need to be eliminated before I would be justified in believing that the animals were  zebras.[8] It could also be argued that CP has unacceptable consequences. Of course, one of those unacceptable consequences may well be Cartesian Skepticism itself, but to point that out in the present context would be dialectically unhelpful. It has been argued, however, that CP by itself has far-reaching skeptical consequences. Notice that the argument for Cartesian Skepticism under consideration contains CP2 as an essential premise. The present concern is that CP by itself (and therefore CP1, if justified on the basis of CP), without help from CP2, has skeptical consequences. If that were true, that would be a reason to be wary of CP, for it would be a much stronger principle than advertised. The argument can be presented as a conflict between CP, on the one hand, and three other principles. Those three other principles are, allegedly, beyond reproach, and so CP is to be blamed for the conflict. The first principle in question may be thought of as enshrining the possibility of knowledge (and justification) by ampliative inference: Ampliativity: It is possible for a subject S to be justified in believing h on the basis of evidence e even if S does not have independent justification (of at least the same degree of S’s justification for believing h) for believing a proposition p such that p and e together entail h. Ampliativity would be true if, for example, we can be justified in believing the conclusion of an inductive argument (say, that all emeralds are green) on the basis of believing its premises (say, that a properly selected group of emeralds have been observed to be green), without in addition being independently justified in believing any other proposition which, together with those premises, entails the conclusion (such as, for example, the proposition that if a properly selected sample of emeralds have all been green, then all emeralds are green). The next principle is in conflict with what we presented above as an alternative possibility to Dretske’s interpretation of the evidential structure of CP. Dretske’s counterexample works, we said, only if CP holds that whatever justifies the subject in believing p is also what justifies her in believing q. But there are two other possibilities. Maybe the evidential relation is reversed: whatever justifies us in believing q justifies us in believing p. Or maybe, we said, p itself, and not whatever justifies us in believing p, justifies us in believing q. The next principle goes directly against this possibility: Mere Lemmas: If S is justified in believing p on the basis of some evidence e, then p itself can justify S in believing some other proposition q only if e justifies S in believing q. We call the principle “Mere Lemmas” because the idea behind it is that if a proposition is a mere lemma, in the sense that it derives all of its justification from some prior evidence e, then it doesn’t have justificatory powers of its own, independent of the justificatory powers of e. Suppose, for instance, that you start out by knowing that Jim has a pet, but you don’t know what kind of pet it is (the example is from Pryor 2004). Then you come to know that it is a hairless pet. Now you become justified (perhaps to a small degree) in believing that Jim’s pet is a hairless dog. That is to say, whatever degree of justification you had before to believe that Jim’s pet is a hairless dog, you are now somewhat more justified in believing that same proposition. That Jim’s pet is a hairless dog of course entails that Jim’s pet is a dog. But your justification for believing that Jim’s pet is a hairless dog cannot in any way be transmuted into justification for believing that Jim’s pet is a dog. Whatever degree of justification you had before for believing that Jim’s pet is a dog, you are now less justified in believing that same proposition (because hairless dogs are a small minority of hairless pets). But what about the example with which we introduced the idea that, sometimes, when e is evidence for p, then p itself can be evidence for q? The example was the following: we can have adequate evidence for believing that 2 is a prime number, and then that proposition itself (that 2 is a prime number) can justify us in believing that that there is at least one even prime number. But, when examined more closely, this is not an obvious counterexample to Mere Lemmas. For, what could our adequate evidence that 2 is a prime number be? Presumably, it would be that 2 is divisible only by 1 and 2. That just is the definition of what it means for 2 to be a prime number, however, so some may balk at the idea that it counts as evidence for the proposition in question (rather than being identical with it). In any case, it would not count as a counterexample to Mere Lemmas. For if we have no evidence for the proposition that 2 is a prime number, then the condition for the application of Mere Lemmas is not  satisfied.[9]  If, on the other hand, our evidence is that 2 is divisible only by 1 and 2, then that proposition itself is obviously evidence for the proposition that an even number is prime. Our final principle is the following: Entailment: If p entails q, then q cannot justify S in disbelieving p. The idea behind this principle is that if p entails q, then should q turn out to be true then things are as p says they are, and so we can hardly use q as evidence against p. We return to Entailment below, but first we show how these three principles are in conflict with CP. Assume, with Ampliativity, that a subject S is justified in believing a proposition h on the basis of some evidence e without having independent justification for believing any other proposition p such that p together with e entails h. Notice that h obviously entails h or not-e. Therefore, by CP, S is justified in believing h or not-e. But, of course, e together with h or not-e entails h. Therefore, if S is justified in believing h on the basis of e, then there is a proposition which S is justified in believing and which together with e entails h. Notice that this is close to, but not quite, the negation of Ampliativity. For Ampliativity denies that there will be any such proposition which S is independently justified in believing, and for all we have said S’s justification for believing h or not-e is not independent. Independent of what? Of S’s justification for believing h itself. For all we have said so far, S might be justified in believing h or not-e on the basis of h, or on the basis of e itself. But, given Mere Lemmas, h cannot justify S in believing any proposition unless e does. Therefore, the only option left open, short of denying Ampliativity, is to argue that e itself justifies S in believing h or not-e. But that is incompatible with Entailment. For notice that for e to justify S in believing h or not-e is for e to justify S in disbelieving its negation, i.e., e and not-h. But, of course, e and not-h entails e, and so the entailment principle has it that e cannot justify S in disbelieving e and not-h—i.e., e cannot justify S in believing h or not-e. Although this particular reconstruction is our own (for more on it, see Comesaña forthcoming), some philosophers have taken arguments similar to it to count against CP (see, for example, Huemer 2001 and Sharon & Spectre 2017, and cf. Comesaña 2017). However, others have argued against Entailment (see, for example, Pryor 2014a,b and Vogel 2014b), and yet others have argued that denying Ampliativity itself is not as absurd as it might sound (Comesaña 2014a,b). The argument cannot, therefore, be taken to be a conclusive blow against CP. Finally, some epistemological theories are in conflict with  CP.[10]  Robert Nozick’s account of knowledge is the best such example. Roughly his account is this (Nozick 1981: 172–187): S knows that p iff: Nozick called his account a “tracking” account of knowledge because whenever S knows that \(p, S\)’s beliefs track p. Think of a guided missile tracking its target. If the target were to move left, the missile would move left. If the target were not to move left, the missile would not move left. According to the tracking account of knowledge our beliefs must track the truth if we are to have knowledge. There is one important clarification of conditions 3 and 4 that is discussed by Nozick, namely, that the method by which S acquires the belief must be held constant from the actual world to the possible world. A doting grandmother might know that her grandchild is not a thief on the basis of sufficiently good evidence, but would still believe that he wasn’t a thief, even if he were, because she loves him. So, we must require that the grandmother use the same method in both the actual and the near possible worlds, for, otherwise, condition (4) would exclude some clear cases of knowledge. This is not the place to provide a full examination of Nozick’s account of  knowledge.[11]  What is crucial for our discussion is that it is easy to see that, if Nozick’s account is correct, closure will fail for knowledge in just the kind of case that the Cartesian Skeptic is putting forward because of condition (4). Suppose S knows that there is a chair before her. Would she know that she is not in a skeptical scenario in which it merely appears that there is a chair? If the fourth condition were a necessary condition of knowledge, she would not know that because if she were in such a scenario, she would be fooled into thinking that she wasn’t. Thus, either condition (4) is too strong or CP fails. There are some reasons for thinking that condition (4) is too strong. Consider, for instance, this case in the literature: You put a glass of ice-cold lemonade on a picnic table in your backyard. You go inside and get a telephone call from a friend and talk for half an hour. When you hang up you remember that you had left the ice-cold lemonade outside exposed to the hot sun and come to believe that it isn’t ice-cold anymore. It would seem that you could know that. Indeed, if it were false, that could only be due to some bizarre circumstance. Thus, if the lemonade were still ice-cold, you would believe that it wasn’t (see Vogel 1987: 206). The moral of this (and similar) cases seems to be that sensitivity is not a correct condition on knowledge. There is much more to say about CP and CP1, but we will move on to considering the argument’s other premise. CP2 claims that we are not justified in denying the skeptical hypothesis—in other words, that we are not justified in believing that we are not being deceived. What arguments can be given for CP2? It is tempting to suggest something like this: The skeptical scenarios are developed in such a way that it is assumed that we could not tell that we were being deceived. For example, we are asked to consider that there is an Evil Genius “so powerful” that it could (1) make me believe that there were hands when there were none and (2) make it such that I could not detect the illusion. But the skeptic must be very careful here. She cannot require that in order for S to know (or be justified in believing) something, say x, that if x were false, she would not still believe x. We have just seen (while examining Nozick’s account of knowledge) that this requirement is arguably too strong. So the mere fact that there could be skeptical scenarios in which S still believes that she is not in such a scenario cannot provide the skeptic with a basis for thinking that she fails to know that she is not (actually) in a skeptical scenario. But even more importantly, were that a requirement of knowledge (or justification), then we have seen that closure would fail and, consequently, the basis for the first premise in the CP-style argument for Cartesian Skepticism would be  forfeited.[12] Ernest Sosa has argued for three interrelated theses regarding CP2 and Nozick’s sensitivity condition: (i) that sensitivity can be easily confused with a different condition on knowledge (which Sosa calls safety); (ii) that while sensitivity is not a correct necessary condition on knowledge, safety is; (iii) finally, that our belief in the negation of skeptical hypotheses is safe despite being  insensitive.[13] Nozick’s sensitivity condition is a subjunctive conditional: if p were false, S would not believe it. The usual way in which such conditionals are evaluated is by assuming that there is an ordering of possible worlds according to how much they resemble the actual world. A subjunctive conditional \(A \rightarrow B\) is true if and only if B is true in the closest (or all the closest) possible worlds where A is true. According to this semantics, subjunctive conditionals do not contrapose (the contrapositive of a conditional if A, B is if not-B, not-A). Thus, suppose that we flip a coin to decide whether you or I will strike this match: heads you strike it, tails I do. The coin comes up head, you strike the match and it lights. In this situation, it is true that if I had struck the match, it would have lit. But it doesn’t seem to be true that if the match hadn’t lit then I wouldn’t have struck it. The match might have failed to lit because it was wet while either of us struck it. In the possible worlds terminology, the closest possible world where I strike the match is a world where it lights, but there are possible worlds where the match doesn’t light and I strike it that are as close to actuality as are worlds where the match doesn’t light and you strike it. After noticing the failure of subjunctives to contrapose, Sosa proposed that we should replace Nozick’s sensitivity condition with its contrapositive, which Sosa calls a ‘safety’ condition. The following formulation seems to capture Sosa’s intent: Safety: S’s belief that p based on e is safe if and only if S would not easily believe that p based on e without it being so that p (in symbols, S believes that p on basis \(e \rightarrow p\)). (Sosa  2002)[14] Now, one initial worry about safety as a condition on knowledge is that, given that belief and truth are also necessary for knowledge, safety will always be (in this context) a true-true conditional (that is to say, both its antecedent and consequent will be true). This means that Sosa cannot accept the possible worlds semantics for subjunctive conditionals briefly sketched above, at least if we assume that every world is closer to itself than any other word. For when we have a true-true conditional, the closest world where the antecedent is true will be the actual world, and so every such conditional will be true (and, hence, any condition formulated by such conditionals will be trivially  satisfied).[15]  Rather, Sosa understands the truth-conditions for the relevant conditions as requiring that the consequent be true in all nearby possible worlds where the antecedent is true. Sosa’s idea, then, is that we can explain away the temptation to think that CP2 is true by noticing that although safety and sensitivity are easily confused with one another, my belief that I am not the victim of a skeptical scenario is insensitive but safe, and that whereas sensitivity is not a condition on knowledge, safety is. But is safety a condition on knowledge? Several authors have thought that, just as there are counterexamples to sensitivity, there are counterexamples to safety as well. Here is one (taken from Comesaña 2005b): Halloween Party: There is a Halloween party at Andy’s house, and I am invited. Andy’s house is very difficult to find, so he hires Judy to stand at a crossroads and direct people towards the house (Judy’s job is to tell people that the party is at the house down the left road). Unbeknownst to me, Andy doesn’t want Michael to go to the party, so he also tells Judy that if she sees Michael she should tell him the same thing she tells everybody else (that the party is at the house down the left road), but she should immediately phone Andy so that the party can be moved to Adam’s house, which is down the right road. I seriously consider disguising myself as Michael, but at the last moment I don’t. When I get to the crossroads, I ask Judy where the party is, and she tells me that it is down the left road. That case is a counterexample to safety insofar as we agree that I know that the party is at the house down the left road, and yet it could very easily have happened that I have that same belief on the same basis without it being so that the belief was true. So far, we have argued that there are dangers in defending CP2 by appealing to the sensitivity condition, and that Sosa’s attack on CP2 might itself be subject to doubt. What else can be said for or against CP2? Let’s go back to the rough idea that there is some kind of epistemic symmetry between what we take to be the actual case and a skeptical scenario. Of course, if we were the victims in a skeptical scenario, we wouldn’t know that we are not (if only because it would be false, but perhaps not only because of that). Given symmetry, even if we are not victims of a skeptical scenario, we do not know that we are not. Moreover, we know all of this. As we suggested in section 1, if we know that we don’t know that p, then we are not even justified in believing that p. Therefore, CP2. Every step in this argument can be challenged, but there is no doubt that many philosophers find something along these lines at least worth thinking about. Let us take a closer look at the first step, the claim that there is an epistemic symmetry between the good case and the skeptical scenario. What can this alleged symmetry amount to? One idea is that we have the same evidence in both cases. According to a Cartesian account of this common evidence, it consists in mental states of the subject, such as her experiences. By construction, the subject has the same experiences in the skeptical scenario as she does in the good case. But some philosophers, most notably Williamson 2000, have denied that we have the same evidence in the good and the skeptical case. According to Williamson, our evidence is constituted not by our experiences, but by what we know. Given that in the good case we know more propositions that in the bad case, we have more evidence in the good case than we do in the skeptical case. In the good case, for instance, we know mundane propositions such as the proposition that we have hands. Given that knowledge entails justification, in the good case we are justified in believing that we have hands. Given CP, in the good case we are justified in believing that we are not in the skeptical case. This account of evidence entails that the relation of indiscriminability between the good case and the skeptical case is not symmetric: victims of a skeptical scenario cannot distinguish the skeptical scenario from the good case (for all they know, they are in the good case, and for all they know, they are in the skeptical case), but subjects in the good case can distinguish between the cases (they know that they are in the good case, and—again, given CP—they know that they are not in the skeptical  case).[16] But even those contemporary philosophers who grant that our epistemic position with respect to external world propositions is the same in the normal case as in the skeptical scenario can object to the symmetry thesis. For even granting (as we must) that in the skeptical scenario we do not know that we are not in the skeptical scenario, it doesn’t follow that in the ordinary case we do not know that we are not in the skeptical scenario, not even assuming that we have the same evidence in both cases. To begin with, an obvious difference between the normal case and the skeptical scenario is that in the skeptical scenario the proposition in question (that we are not in the skeptical scenario) is false, whereas in the normal case it is true. Given that knowledge requires truth, we can explain why we lack knowledge in the skeptical scenario by appealing to this truth condition on knowledge, rather than to the paucity of our evidence. In other words, our evidence for thinking that we are not in the skeptical scenario, this reply holds, is good enough to know that proposition, if only it were true. Now, the skeptic can then reply that not all skeptical scenarios are such that external worlds propositions are false in them. For instance, if I am right now dreaming that I have hands I do not thereby know that I have hands, even though I do have hands while dreaming. We noted above that the introduction of skeptical hypotheses which do not entail the falsity of external world propositions complicates the CP argument, but let us here bracket that issue. For, in addition to truth, knowledge plausibly requires other non-evidential conditions. In the wake of the Gettier problem, for instance, many philosophers have accepted that besides belief, justification and truth, the right kind of relation between the truth of the proposition and the belief must hold, and arguably it is this that fails in the dreaming scenario, rather than (again) the paucity of our evidence (see entry on  the analysis of knowledge).  Therefore, it can be held that there is an asymmetry between the good case and the skeptical scenario even if we grant that we have the same evidence in both cases. The Cartesian skeptic can nevertheless raise an uncomfortable question at this point: what is this alleged evidence in favor of the proposition that we are not in a skeptical scenario? One tempting answer is that the evidence in question consists precisely of those external world propositions which are the target of the Cartesian argument. I know that I have hands, and, according to this view, that very proposition is my evidence for the proposition that I am not a handless brain in a vat. But recall our discussion of Dretske’s mule case. There we pointed out that Dretske is, in effect, assimilating Closure and Transmission principles—i.e., assuming that the only way in which Closure principles can hold is if some evidence e is evidence both for p and any q entailed by p. We noted then that there is at least another possibility: it might be that we must be antecedently justified in believing q in order to be justified in believing some p which entails it. And indeed, it seems plausible that this is the direction of the evidential relation between external world propositions and the negation of skeptical hypotheses: we cannot be justified in believing external world propositions unless we have antecedent justification for believing the negation of skeptical hypotheses (but cf. Pryor 2000). Another alternative is to say that no evidence justifies us in believing the negations of skeptical hypotheses, but that we are nevertheless justified in believing them. On one version of this view, put forward by Crispin Wright 2004, our entitlement to accept that we are not in a skeptical scenario does not depend on our having any kind of evidence, either empirical or a priori (see also Coliva (2015) for a development of a view in this neighborhood). Indeed, we are entitled to accept those propositions because unless we were we would not be justified in believing any proposition. Notice two important terminological points in the statement of Wright’s view: he doesn’t think that we are justified in believing that we are not in a skeptical scenario, but that we are entitled to accept that proposition. What are the differences between justification and entitlement, on the one hand, and belief and acceptance, on the other? Roughly, what we are calling justification Wright calls “warrant”. He thinks that there are two kinds of warrant: we can be warranted in believing a proposition because we have an evidential justification for it (where the evidence consists of the propositions we are warranted in believing or accepting), or we can be entitled to accept it even in the absence of any justification for them. As for the difference between belief and acceptance, Wright is prepared to grant that to count as a belief an attitude must be evidence-based, and so entitlements cannot be entitlements to believe. To be entitled to accept a proposition, for Wright, is to be justified in behaving (where “behavior” is understood broadly, to include cognitive inferential behavior, for instance) approximately as one would if one believed the proposition. On another version of the view, although we do not have empirical evidence for the proposition that we are not in a skeptical scenario, we do have a kind of justification for it which does not rest exclusively on the fact that if we didn’t then we wouldn’t be justified in believing anything. Stewart Cohen 2010 has argued that our justification for believing that we are not in a skeptical scenario derives from the rationality of certain inferential rules (see also Wedgwood 2013). One such rule justifies us in concluding (defeasibly) that there is something red in front of us if we have an experience with the content that there is something red in front of us. Now, we can use that rule “online”, when we do in fact have an experience with the content that there is something red in front of us, or “offline”, assuming for the sake of argument that we have an experience with the content that there is something red in front of us to see what follows from it. According to the rule in question, it follows (again, defeasibly) that there is something red in front of us. We can now cancel the assumption by concluding (defeasibly) with the following conditional: if I have an experience with the content that there is something red in front of me, then there is something red in front of me. Notice that this conditional is incompatible with one specific skeptical hypothesis: the hypothesis that (for whatever reason) I have an experience with the content that there is something red in front of me but there is nothing red in front of me.