 In the previous sections we have seen that states of affairs are of value if the necessarily co-obtaining states of affairs are distinct. This gives us a reason to reject Chisholm’s (1976: 118) thesis that necessarily co-obtaining states of affairs are identical. At the same time it puts weight on the characterization of states of affairs as “involving” objects and properties or as composed out of objects and properties. It seems intuitively plausible that the state of affairs Socrates’s being wise involves Socrates and the property of being wise. But in what way do states of affairs involve particulars and properties? Ordered n-tuples have members. Are states of affairs n-tuples that have objects and properties as members? Is, for example, the state of affairs Socrates’s being wise nothing but the ordered pair \(\langle\)Socrates, being wise\(\rangle\)? Plantinga answers NO: Clearly there are many set-theoretical models of our talk about states of affairs and individuals. Why pick any of them as more revealing than the others? (Plantinga 1984: 327) We can model states of affairs as ordered n-tuples in many different ways. But there seems no way to decide between \(\langle\)Socrates, being wise\(\rangle\) and \(\langle\)being wise, Socrates\(\rangle\) as the right model for the state of affairs. Hence, the state of affairs is not identical with either ordered pair (see Pollock 1984b: 138). Some philosophers spell out “involvement” as containment: A state of affairs is a complex that contains properties and particulars as parts. In order to assess this proposal, let us first sharpen our understanding of the part-of relation. Any relation worthy of the name “(proper) part-of” must be reflexive (everything is part of itself), transitive (if x is a part of y and z a part of x, z is a part of y) and antisymmetrical (if x is part of y and y part of x, x is identical to y) (see the entry on  mereology,  sect. 2 and 3). A further plausible principle for the part-of relation is the supplementation principle: if x is not part of y, there is an object z that is part of y and that does overlap, that is, have a part in common, with y. The supplementation principle implies the intuitively plausible view that nothing can have a single proper part. The supplementation principle together with the uncontroversial axioms for the (proper) part-of relation also implies the more controversial thesis that complex objects with the same parts are identical (see entry on  mereology,  3.2). The transitivity of part-of immediately gives rise to problems. For instance, Frege wrote to Wittgenstein: [If Vesuvius is part of a state of affairs,] it seems that parts of Vesuvius must also be parts of this fact; the fact will hence also consist of solidified lava. This does not seem right to me. (Frege 1919: 20; my translation) If Vesuvius is part of the obtaining state of affairs Vesuvius’s being a volcano, the state of affairs must by the transitivity of part-of contain the parts of solidified lava that are parts of Vesuvius. But if the state of affairs contains the solidified lava as parts, it must have a weight and an extension etc. However, the state of affairs Vesuvius’s being a volcano is not a thing that has weight etc. There are further problems for the view that states of affairs are complexes. If the state of affairs a’s being F has only a and being F as its parts (in any plausible sense of “part”), it can only exist at a time at which a and being F exist (the sum of all my body parts exists only at the time when all my body parts exist). Hence, the state of affairs a’s ceasing to exist before b’s starting to exist cannot be a complex containing a and b. For there is no time when its constituents both exist (see Künne 2003: 122). The principles for the (proper) part-of relation imply that complexes with the same parts are identical. But take the state of affairs that Romeo loves Juliet. If it has Romeo, Love and Juliet as its parts, it is the same as the state of affairs that Juliet loves Romeo. But intuitively, the state of affairs Juliet’s loving Romeo is different from the state of affairs Romeo’s loving Juliet. On the standard mereological conception of part, particulars and universals are not parts of states of affairs. The last point cuts both ways. Why not say that different complex objects can have the same parts? Armstrong (1997: 118) answered this question positively and argued that facts are non-mereological composites. Lewis has denied that there is room for non-mereological composition (see Lewis 1992: 213; for discussion McDaniel 2009). However, independently of considerations about states of affairs we allow for different wholes that share all their parts. For instance, the sentences “John loves Mary” and “Mary loves John” both consist of the same words “John”, “Mary” and “loves”, yet they are clearly different sentences. But our intuitive notion does not allow for wholes without remainder: if something x is part of a whole W, there is a remainder of W that is not identical with x. The remainder principle is implied by the supplementation principle of mereology, but not the other way around (see  mereology  entry, sect. 3.2) Hence, we can draw on the remainder principle without endorsing the stronger supplementation principle. Now there seem to be states of affairs that “contain” only one property (Bynoe 2011 argues the following point in detail). Bradley's Regress which was discussed in  section 3.1 seems to show that  the state of affairs Socrates’ being wise consists  only of Socrates and being wise. There is no relation that  ties them to a state of affairs. Otherwise the question would arise  what relates this relation to Socrates and being wise. Now  some properties instantiate themselves: identity is  self-identical. Hence, the state of affairs identity’s  being self-identical obtains. But this state of affairs contains  only the property of identity. There seems to be no plausible sense  of “part” in which such states of affairs have parts. We are back then to the problem of how to make sense of how a state of affairs involves properties and particulars. In order to solve it, we need to find a relation between the state of affairs a’s being F and a and being F that (i) does not make a and being F parts of the state of affairs, (ii) allows one to distinguish between necessarily co-obtaining states of affairs, and (iii) distinguishes the state of affairs a’s being F from other objects that, intuitively speaking, involve a and being F. Fine (1982: 51–2) has suggested an answer that invokes the independently motivated idea that the identity of some objects is explained in terms of the identity of other objects (see also Fine 1995; Bynoe 2011: 99–100; and Keller 2013: 669). Consider Fine’s example of the singleton of 1. The singleton of 1 is the set whose sole member is 1. The singleton of 1 is ontologically dependent on 1 because its identity depends on the identity of 1. We explain what the singleton is by appealing to 1, but not the other way around. Similarly, the identity of (atomic) states of affairs is explained in terms of objects and properties. Fine (1982: 52) takes basic states of affairs—propositions in his terminology—to be the results of the application of the operation of predication to particulars and properties. We say what the state of affairs a’s being F is by saying that it is the result of predicating being F to a. Hence, the state of affairs  a’s being F depends on being F to a. Complex states of affairs are the result of the application of such operations as conjunction and disjunction to basic states of affairs (on Operationalism as a general approach see Fine 2010: 564ff). The notion of predication gives rise to several questions and we will come back to it in the next section. If states of affairs are ontologically dependent on particulars and properties, we can satisfy the desiderata (i) to (iii): (i) An object can ontologically depend on other objects without being a complex that contains these objects as parts. The axis of the earth ontologically depends on the Earth, but it does not contain the Earth as a constituent. The assumption that the state of affairs  a’s being F ontologically depends on a and F can therefore solve the problems that arise for the assumption that it contains a and F. Take for example Frege’s intuitive argument against the view that states of affairs contain physical objects like Vesuvius. The state of affairs Vesuvius’s being a volcano ontologically depends on Vesuvius, but it does not contain it as a part. Hence, it does not contain the lava parts that are the parts of Vesuvius. There is no need to ascribe weight etc. to the state of affairs. Ontological dependence helps us to get around the temporal problems raised by the logical complex view of states of affairs. While a complex cannot exist at a time at which some of its parts don’t exist, an object can ontologically depend on objects that no longer exist. (I ontologically depend on a particular event, the fertilization of a particular egg by a particular sperm, although this event is long past.) (ii) Fine’s proposal suggests that states of affairs are individuated in terms of the objects and relations in virtue of which they exist: This criterion of identity for states of affairs distinguishes between the necessarily co-obtaining states of affairs Hesperus’s being self-identical and Socrates’ being self-identical because they ontologically depend on different things. Hence, they come out as different. In turn, Hesperus’s being a planet and Phosphorus’s being a planet come out, as it is desirable, as the same state of affairs. (iii) If the state of affairs Hesperus’s being a planet ontologically depends on Hesperus, it can only exist if Hesperus exists at some time. In contrast, a thought can exist whether or not the objects it purports to be about ever existed or will exist. The thought that Pegasus is a horse exists, whether there is such a horse or not. The notion of ontologically dependence sheds light on the sense in which states of affairs “involve” particulars and properties: a state of affairs involves those objects on which it ontologically depends. But the notion of ontologically dependence does not do the main work in the account proposed. It is because some properties are predicated of some objects that (i) they form a state of affairs (ii) such that this state of affairs depends on them and can be said to involve them. A fundamental question about states of affairs concerns then the conditions of predicability. We will come back to this question.