 Intuitively, given that a sentence expresses a structured proposition, the proposition will have parts or constituents that are the semantic values of words or subsentential complex linguistic expressions occurring in the sentence; and the proposition will have a structure similar to the structure of the sentence. For example, assuming that the semantic value of a name is its bearer and that the semantic value of a transitive verb is a relation, a structured proposition theorist will likely hold that the sentence expresses a proposition consisting of Jason, the loving relation and Patty, bound together in some way into a unity. Letting ‘j’ stand for Jason, ‘p’ for Patty and ‘L’ for the loving relation, we can represent the proposition in question as follows: Thus (1a)’s structure is very close to that of (1); and (1a) has as constituents the semantic values of the words occurring in (1). Indeed, in the case of (1) and (1a), all and only semantic values of words in the sentence are constituents of the proposition. But a given account of structured propositions may not hold that this is the case in general for any one of at least three reasons. First, one might hold that certain words as they occur in phrases in sentences do not contribute their semantic values to the propositions expressed by those sentences because the semantic values of these words instead partially determine the semantic values of the phrases in which they occur, where these latter semantic values are contributed to the proposition. For example, one might hold that in the sentence the phrase ‘is a tall young man’ contributes to the proposition expressed by (2) the property of being a tall young man, which is its semantic value. Thus, though the semantic value of the word ‘tall’ partly determines the semantic value of the phrase ‘is a tall young man’, the proposition expressed by (2) contains no constituent that is the semantic value of the word ‘tall’ alone. Second, one might hold that a sentence may express a proposition (in a context), where the proposition has constituents not contributed by any syntactic constituent of the sentence, let alone any word in the sentence. For example, Mark Crimmins [1992] claims that an utterance of the sentence expresses a proposition to the effect that it is raining at a particular time and place. The present tense manages to somehow contribute the time of utterance to the proposition. But no syntactic constituent of the sentence contributes the place to the proposition, though Crimmins claims it is a constituent of the proposition  expressed.[4]  Third, one might hold that certain words simply have no semantic values, and so make no contribution to propositions. So-called neoplanastic ‘ne’ in French might be thought to be an example of this. But even if, for one of the above reasons or some other reason, a sentence does not express a proposition whose constituents are precisely the semantic values of words in the sentence, we can still say that structured proposition theorists hold that sentences expresses propositions, where many (and likely most) constituents of the proposition are semantic values of words or phrases occurring in the sentence. So in the case of (1) and (1a), the constituents of the proposition are precisely the semantic values of the words in (1). In the case of (2) and (2a) (given the assumptions made above), the constituents of (2a) are precisely the semantic values of the name ‘Colin’ and the verb phrase ‘is a tall young man’. And in the case of (3), the proposition it expresses has three constituents, two of which are contributed by ‘raining’ and the present tense construction. Thus, ignoring, or at least not dwelling on, the qualifications just made, we can say that structured proposition theorists hold that sentences express propositions that are complex entities (most of) whose constituents are the semantic values of expressions occurring in the sentence, where these constituents are bound together by some structure inducing bond that renders the structure of the proposition similar to the structure of the sentence expressing it. This highlights an important feature of structured proposition accounts that distinguishes them from the other main competing account of propositions, namely the account of propositions as sets of possible worlds (to be discussed below). Because structured propositions have as parts the semantic values of expressions in the sentences expressing them, the semantic values of those expressions are recoverable from the semantic values of the sentences (i.e. the propositions). It is perhaps worth noting that one could have a theory according to which the semantic values of expressions in a sentence are recoverable from the proposition expressed by the sentence, even though the semantic values of the expressions are not (mereological or set theoretic) parts of the proposition. For example, George Bealer [1993] formulates what he calls an algebraic conception of propositions (see also Bealer [1982]). Bealer associates with each proposition a “decomposition tree.” This decomposition tree shows how a given proposition is the result of the application of logical operations to individuals, properties, relations or other propositions (e.g. the application of the logical operation of negation to a proposition P yields a proposition that is true iff P is false; the application of the logical operation of singular predication to an item and a property yields a proposition that is true iff the item possesses the property, etc.). In general, a sentence will express a proposition such that the semantic values of expressions in the sentence will occur on the decomposition tree associated with the proposition. Thus, the semantic values of expressions in a sentence will be recoverable from the proposition (together with its decomposition tree) expressed by the sentence. However, Bealer denies that these semantic values are in any sense set-theoretic members or mereological parts of the proposition. Bealer appears to hold that the proposition is metaphysically simple and has no parts at all. As the term is used here then, Bealer’s is not an account of structured propositions for this reason. We will see below that others hold similar “algebraic” conceptions of propositions, where the propositions are complex entities consisting of constituents bound together in certain ways and so are structured propositions. Since the structured proposition expressed by a sentence has a structure similar to that of the sentence and has as constituents semantic values of expressions occurring in the sentence, the theory of structured propositions allows for distinct necessarily equivalent propositions. For example, the propositions expressed by ‘Bachelors are unmarried’ and ‘Brothers are male siblings’ presumably are both necessarily true and hence are necessarily equivalent. But clearly the propositions expressed by these sentences have different constituents and so are distinct. The proposition expressed by the former presumably contains the semantic value of ‘bachelor’ (perhaps, the property of being a bachelor), whereas the proposition expressed by the latter doesn’t. And the proposition expressed by the latter contains the semantic value of ‘brother’, whereas the proposition expressed by the former doesn’t. This is an important virtue of the structured proposition view. The fact that it has this feature and that its main competitor, the possible worlds account of propositions (discussed below), doesn’t is one of the reasons many favor the structured proposition view. In discussing recent accounts of structured propositions below, it will be shown how, on those accounts, sentences that are necessarily equivalent may express distinct propositions; and how the semantic values of expressions in a sentence are recoverable from the proposition expressed by the sentence.