 How are Mentalese expressions individuated? Since Mentalese expressions are types, answering this question requires us to consider the type/token relation for Mentalese. We want to fill in the schema e and e* are tokens of the same Mentalese type iff R(e, e*). What should we substitute for R(e, e*)? The literature typically focuses on primitive symbol types, and we will follow suit here. It is almost universally agreed among contemporary LOT theorists that Mentalese tokens are neurophysiological entities of some sort. One might therefore hope to individuate Mentalese types by citing neural properties of the tokens. Drawing R(e, e*) from the language of neuroscience induces a theory along the following lines: Neural individuation: e and e* are tokens of the same primitive Mentalese type iff e and e* are tokens of the same neural type. This schema leaves open how neural types are individuated. We may bypass that question here, because neural individuation of Mentalese types finds no proponents in the contemporary literature. The main reason is that it conflicts with    multiple realizability:   the doctrine that a single mental state type can be realized by physical systems that are wildly heterogeneous when described in physical, biological, or neuroscientific terms. Putnam (1967) introduced multiple realizability as evidence against the   mind/brain identity theory,  which asserts that mental state types are brain state types. Fodor (1975: 13–25) further developed the multiple realizability argument, presenting it as foundational to LOTH. Although the multiple realizability argument has subsequently been challenged (Polger 2004), LOT theorists widely agree that we should not individuate Mentalese types in neural terms. The most popular strategy is to individuate Mentalese types functionally: Functional individuation: e and e* are tokens of the same primitive Mentalese type iff e and e* have the same functional role. Field (2001: 56–67), Fodor (1994: 105–109), and Stich (1983: 149–151) pursue functional individuation. They specify functional roles using a Turing-style computationalism formalism, so that “functional role” becomes something like “computational role”, i.e., role within mental computation. Functional roles theories divide into two categories: molecular and holist. Molecular theories isolate privileged canonical relations that a symbol bears to other symbols. Canonical relations individuate the symbol, but non-canonical relations do not. For example, one might individuate Mentalese conjunction solely through the introduction and elimination rules governing conjunction while ignoring any other computational rules. If we say that a symbol’s “canonical functional role” is constituted by its canonical relations to other symbols, then we can offer the following theory: Molecular functional individuation: e and e* are tokens of the same primitive Mentalese type iff e and e* have the same canonical functional role. One problem facing molecular individuation is that, aside from logical connectives and a few other special cases, it is difficult to draw any principled demarcation between canonical and non-canonical relations (Schneider 2011: 106). Which relations are canonical for  SOFA?[9]  Citing the demarcation problem, Schneider espouses a holist approach that individuates mental symbols through total functional role, i.e., every single aspect of the role that a symbol plays within mental activity: Holist functional individuation: e and e* are tokens of the same primitive Mentalese type iff e and e* have the same total functional role. Holist individuation is very fine-grained: the slightest difference in total functional role entails that different types are tokened. Since different thinkers will always differ somewhat in their mental computations, it now looks like two thinkers will never share the same mental language. This consequence is worrisome, for two reasons emphasized by Aydede (1998). First, it violates the plausible publicity constraint that propositional attitudes are in principle shareable. Second, it apparently precludes interpersonal psychological explanations that cite Mentalese expressions. Schneider (2011: 111–158) addresses both concerns, arguing that they are misdirected. A crucial consideration when individuating mental symbols is what role to assign to semantic properties. Here we may usefully compare Mentalese with natural language. It is widely agreed that natural language words do not have their denotations essentially. The English word “cat” denotes cats, but it could just as well have denoted dogs, or the number 27, or anything else, or nothing at all, if our linguistic conventions had been different. Virtually all contemporary LOT theorists hold that a Mentalese word likewise does not have its denotation essentially. The Mentalese word cat denotes cats, but it could have had a different denotation had it born different causal relations to the external world or had it occupied a different role in mental activity. In that sense, cat is a piece of formal syntax. Fodor’s early view (1981: 225–253) was that a Mentalese word could have had a different denotation but not an arbitrarily different denotation: cat could not have denoted just anything—it could not have denoted the number 27—but it could have denoted some other animal species had the thinker suitably interacted with that species rather than with cats. Fodor eventually (1994, 2008) embraces the stronger thesis that a Mentalese word bears an arbitrary relation to its denotation: cat could have had any arbitrarily different denotation. Most contemporary theorists agree (Egan 1992: 446; Field 2001: 58; Harnad 1994: 386; Haugeland 1985: 91: 117–123; Pylyshyn 1984: 50). The historical literature on LOTH suggests an alternative semantically permeated view: Mentalese words are individuated partly through their denotations. The Mentalese word cat is not a piece of formal syntax subject to reinterpretation. It could not have denoted another species, or the number 27, or anything else. It denotes cats by its inherent nature. From a semantically permeated viewpoint, a Mentalese word has its denotation essentially. Thus, there is a profound difference between natural language and mental language. Mental words, unlike natural language words, bring with them one fixed semantic interpretation. The semantically permeated approach is present in Ockham, among other medieval LOT theorists (Normore 2003, 2009). In light of the problems facing neural and functional individuation, Aydede (2005) recommends that we consider taking semantics into account when individuating Mentalese expressions. Rescorla (2012b) concurs, defending a semantically permeated approach as applied to at least some mental representations. He proposes that certain mental computations operate over mental symbols with essential semantic properties, and he argues that the proposal fits well with many sectors of cognitive  science.[10] A recurring complaint about the semantically permeated approach is that inherently meaningful mental representations seem like highly suspect entities (Putnam 1988: 21). How could a mental word have one fixed denotation by its inherent nature? What magic ensures the necessary connection between the word and the denotation? These worries diminish in force if one keeps firmly in mind that Mentalese words are types. Types are abstract entities corresponding to a scheme for classifying, or type-identifying, tokens. To ascribe a type to a token is to type-identify the token as belonging to some category. Semantically permeated types correspond to a classificatory scheme that takes semantics into account when categorizing tokens. As Burge emphasizes (2007: 302), there is nothing magical about semantically-based classification. On the contrary, both folk psychology and cognitive science routinely classify mental events based at least partly upon their semantic properties. A simplistic implementation of the semantically permeated approach individuates symbol tokens solely through their denotations: Denotational individuation: e and e* are tokens of the same primitive Mentalese type iff e and e* have the same denotation. As Aydede (2000) and Schneider (2011) emphasize, denotational individuation is unsatisfying. Co-referring words may play significantly different roles in mental activity. Frege’s (1892 [1997]) famous Hesperus-Phosphorus example illustrates: one can believe that Hesperus is Hesperus without believing that Hesperus is Phosphorus. As Frege put it, one can think about the same denotation “in different ways”, or “under different modes of presentation”. Different modes of presentation have different roles within mental activity, implicating different psychological explanations. Thus, a semantically permeated individuative scheme adequate for psychological explanation must be finer-grained than denotational individuation allows. It must take mode of presentation into account. But what it is to think about a denotation “under the same mode of presentation”? How are “modes of presentation” individuated? Ultimately, semantically permeated theorists must grapple with these questions. Rescorla (forthcoming) offers some suggestions about how to  proceed.[11] Chalmers (2012) complains that semantically permeated individuation sacrifices significant virtues that made LOTH attractive in the first place. LOTH promised to advance naturalism by grounding cognitive science in non-representational computational models. Representationally-specified computational models seem like a significant retrenchment from these naturalistic ambitions. For example, semantically permeated theorists cannot accept the FSC explanation of semantic coherence, because they do not postulate formal syntactic types manipulated during mental computation. How compelling one finds naturalistic worries about semantically permeated individuation will depend on how impressive one finds the naturalistic contributions made by formal mental syntax. We saw earlier that FSC arguably engenders a worrisome epiphenomenalism. Moreover, the semantically permeated approach in no way precludes a naturalistic reduction of intentionality. It merely precludes invoking formal syntactic Mentalese types while executing such a reduction. For example, proponents of the semantically permeated approach can still pursue the causal or nomic naturalizing strategies discussed in  section 7.  Nothing about either strategy presupposes formal syntactic Mentalese types. Thus, it is not clear that replacing a formal syntactic individuative scheme with a semantically permeated scheme significantly impedes the naturalistic endeavor. No one has yet provided an individuative scheme for Mentalese that commands widespread assent. The topic demands continued investigation, because LOTH remains highly schematic until its proponents clarify sameness and difference of Mentalese types.