 Our concern to this point has been only with what the deflationary  theory is. In the remainder of this article, we consider six  objections. These are by no means the only objections that have been  advanced against deflationism — Horwich (1998b) considers  thirty-nine different objections! — but they do seem  particularly obvious and important. We noted earlier that deflationism can be presented in either a  sententialist version or a propositionalist version. Some  philosophers have suggested, however, that the choice between these  two versions constitutes a dilemma for deflationism (Jackson, Oppy  and Smith 1994). The objection is that if deflationism is construed  in accordance with propositionalism, then it is trivial, but if it is construed in accordance with sententialism it is false. To illustrate the dilemma, consider the following claim: Now, does snow is white refer to a sentence or a  proposition? If, on the one hand, we take (7) to be about a sentence, then, assuming (7) can be interpreted as making a necessary claim,  (7) is false. On the face of it, after all, it takes a lot more than  snow's being white for it to be the case that ‘snow is  white’ is true. In order that ‘snow is white’ be  true, it must be the case not only that snow is white, it must in  addition be the case that ‘snow is white’ means  that snow is white. But this is a fact about language that (7)  ignores. On the other hand, suppose we take snow is white to denote a proposition; in particular, suppose we take it to denote the proposition that snow is white. Then the theory looks to be trivial,  since the proposition that snow is white is defined as being true  just in case snow is white. In short, the deflationist is faced with  a dilemma: take deflationism to be a theory of sentences and it is  false; take it to be a theory of propositions, on the other hand, and it is trivial. Of the two horns of this dilemma, it might seem that the best  strategy for deflationists is to remain with the propositionalist  version of their doctrine and accept its triviality. A trivial  doctrine, after all, at least has the advantage of being true.  Moreover, the charge of triviality is something that deflationists  might well be expected to wear as a badge of honor: since  deflationists are advocating their theory as following from mundane  facts about which everyone can agree, it is no wonder that the theory they advocate is trivial. However, there are a number of reasons why deflationists have  typically not endorsed this option. First, the triviality at issue  here does not have its source in the concept of truth, but rather in  the concept of a proposition. Second, a trivial version of  deflationism says nothing about the theory of meaning, where by  ‘theory of meaning’ we mean an account of the connections between sentences of natural language and the propositions they  express. After all, if deflationists are attending only to  propositions, they are evidently not attending to the  relation between sentences and propositions. Of course, one might  point out that other theories of truth are also silent on the theory  of meaning — why then can deflationism not be? However, the  fact is that many deflationists present their doctrine as a central  part of a much bigger philosophical project, viz., to provide a  deflationary account of all the semantic notions, that is, notions  such as truth, reference, and meaning. The problem for deflationists  who grasp the second horn of the dilemma is that they must admit that there is no way to complete this project: the deflationary theory of  truth can only be maintained by remaining silent about the theory of  meaning. And this means that deflationism should be understood as a  much more modest project than it is often taken to be. The other possible response to this dilemma is to accept that  deflationism applies inter alia to sentences, but to argue that the  sentences to which it applies must be interpreted sentences, i.e., sentences which have meaning. Of course, if the sentences to  which deflationism applies are interpreted sentences, then there will be no force to the objection that deflationism is ignoring the fact  that sentences have meaning. Deflationism, on this interpretation, is not so much ignoring this fact as assuming it. On either plausible response to the dilemma, then, the deflationist  makes use of the notion of meaning to explain truth. This fact has  led a number of philosophers to argue that, on pain of circularity,  deflationism cannot be combined with theories of meaning that make  use of the notion of truth to explain meaning — in particular,  that deflationism is incompatible with truth-conditional theories of  meaning (e.g. Dummett 1959, Davidson 1990, Horwich 1998b, Kalderon  1999, Collins 2002). Other philosophers have also suggested that  deflationism is incompatible with truth-conditional theories of  meaning on the grounds that granting truth any kind of  explanatory role is inconsistent with deflationism (Davidson 1990,  Field 1986, 1994). If deflationism is inconsistent with truth-conditional theories of  meaning, this is not obviously an objection to deflationism. After all, there are alternative theories of meaning available: both  Paul Horwich and Hartry Field have in different ways defended a  version of a use theory of meaning (see Field 1994a, Horwich 1998a).  There is, however, a lot of work to be done before a use theory can  be regarded as a successful theory of meaning. What about the claim that deflationism is inconsistent with truth-conditional theories of meaning? As William G. Lycan notes (Bar-On et al 2005), the charges of circularity in the literature have been impressionistic and so remain difficult to evaluate.  Moreover, on the surface at least, the circularity charge would seem to show that even inflationism about truth is inconsistent with truth-conditional theories of meaning, since all theories of truth will have to take meaning for granted in some sense — for example, in deciding which sentences are truth-apt (For criticisms of the circularity charge, see Gupta 1993, Horisk 2008, Lance 1997, Williams 1999.) On the other hand, worries about the explanatory role truth plays in  truth-conditional theories of meaning can only be evaluated if we  know, first, what sort of explanatory role truth plays in such  theories, and, second, what sort of explanatory roles are ruled out  by deflationism. It seems clear, for example, that if the concept of  truth is only employed in truth-conditional theories of meaning as a  device of generalization, there is no inconsistency with deflationary theories of truth. But does truth have only this role in  truth-conditional theories of meaning? The compatibility of  deflationism about truth and truth-conditional theories of meaning  seems to us an important and unanswered question. (For recent  discussion, see Williams 1999, Bar-On et al 2005, Collins 2002, Gupta and Martinez-Fernandez 2005, Horisk 2007 and Field 2005.) It is often said that what is most obvious about truth is that truth  consists in correspondence to the facts — for example, that the truth of the proposition that the earth revolves around the sun  consists in its correspondence to the fact that the earth revolves  around the sun. The so-called correspondence theory of truth is built around this intuition, and tries to explain the notion of truth by  appeal to the notions of correspondence and fact. Even if one does  not build one's theory of truth around this intuition  however, many philosophers regard it as a condition of adequacy on  any theory of truth that the theory accommodates the correspondence  intuition. It is often objected to deflationism, however, that the doctrine has  particular trouble meeting this adequacy condition. One way to bring  out the problem here is by focusing on a particular articulation of  the correspondence intuition, an articulation favoured by  deflationists themselves (Horwich 1998b). According to this way of  spelling it out, the intuition that a certain sentence or proposition ‘corresponds to the facts’ is the intuition that the  sentence or proposition is true because of a certain way the world is; that is, the truth of the proposition is explained by some contingent fact which is usually external to the proposition  itself. We might express this by saying that someone who endorses the correspondence intuition so understood would endorse: Now, the problem with (8) is that, when we combine it with the deflationary theory-or at least with a necessary version of that theory-we can derive something that is plainly false. Someone who holds a necessary version of deflationism would clearly be committed to the necessary truth of: And, since (9) is a necessary truth, it is very plausible to suppose that (8) and (9) together entail: Unfortunately, however, (10) is false. The reason is that the relation reported by ‘because’ in (8) and (10) is a causal or explanatory relation, and such relations must obtain between distinct relata. But the relata in (10) are (obviously) not distinct. Hence (10) is false. But this means that the conjunction of (8) and (9) must be false, and that deflationism is inconsistent with the correspondence intuition. To borrow a phrase of Mark Johnston's — who mounts a similar argument in a different context — we might put the point differently by saying that, if deflationism is true, then what seems to be a perfectly good explanation in (8) goes missing; if deflationism is true, after all, then (8) is equivalent to (10), and (10) is not an explanation of anything. How might a deflationist respond to this objection? One response is  to provide a different articulation of the correspondence intuition.  For example, one might point out that the connection between the  proposition that snow is white and snow's being white is not a  contingent connection, and suggest that this rules out (8) as a  successful articulation of the correspondence intuition. That  intuition (one might continue) is more plausibly given voice by (8*): However, when (8*) is conjoined with (9), one cannot derive the problematic (10), and thus, one might think, the objection from correspondence might be avoided. Now certainly this is a possible suggestion; the problem with it, however, is that a deflationist who thinks that (8*) is true is most plausibly construed as holding a sententialist, rather than a propositionalist, version of deflationism. A sententialist version of deflationism, on the other hand, will in turn supply a version of (9), viz.: which, at least it is interpreted as a necessary truth, will conspire with (8*) to yield (10). And we are back where we started. Another response would be to object that ‘because’  creates an opaque context — that is, the kind of context within  which one cannot substitute co-referring expressions and preserve  truth. If ‘because’ creates an opaque context, then it  would be illegitimate to suppose that (8) and (9) entail (10). This  too is a possibility; however, it is not clear that  ‘because’ creates opaque context of the right kind. In  general we can distinguish two kinds of opaque context: intensional  contexts, which allow the substitution of necessarily co-referring  expressions but not contingently co-referring expressions; and  hyper-intensional contexts, which do not even allow the substitution  of necessarily co-referring expressions. If the inference from (8)  and (9) to (10) is to be successfully blocked, it is necessary that  ‘because’ creates a hyper-intensional context. However,  it is open to a friend of the correspondence objection to argue that, while ‘because’ creates an intensional context, it does  not create a hyper-intensional context. A final, and most radical, response would be to reject the  correspondence intuition outright. This response is not in fact as  drastic as it sounds. In particular, the deflationist does not have  to say that someone who says ‘the proposition that snow is  white corresponds to the facts’ is speaking falsely.  Deflationists would do better to say that such a person is simply  using a picturesque or ornate way of saying that the proposition is  true, where truth is understood in accordance with the deflationary  theory. Indeed, the deflationist can even agree that for certain  rhetorical or conversational purposes, it might be more effective to  use the ‘correspondence to the facts’ talk. Nevertheless, it is important to see that this response does involve a burden,  since it involves rejecting a condition of adequacy that many regard  as binding on a theory of truth Philosophy of language has isolated a class of propositions that are  supposed to fail of truth-value. According to some moral  philosophers, for example, moral propositions — such as the  injunction that one ought to return people's phone calls — are  neither true nor false. The same thing is true, according to some  philosophers of language, about propositions which presuppose the  existence of something which does not in fact exist — such as  the claim that the present King of France is bald; about propositions that are vague — such as the proposition that wall hangings are furniture; and about propositions that are paradoxical, such as those that arise in connection with the liar paradox. Let us call this  thesis the gap, since it finds a gap in the class of propositions  between those that are true and those that are false. The deflationary theory of truth is inconsistent with there being a  gap in the class of propositions, and this has been thought by many  to be an objection to the theory. The reason for the inconsistency is very simple, and flows directly from the deflationist theory of  falsity that we considered earlier. Suppose, for reductio, that the  gap is correct and thus that there is a proposition Q which  lacks a truth-value. Obviously, since Q lacks a truth-value, it is not the case that it is true or false. But now consider the  equivalence schema (F-prop): It is clear from (F-prop) that if it is not the case that Q  is true or false, then it is not the case that Q is true or  not true. But that is a contradiction: it must be the case that  Q is true or not true. We have been led to this  contradiction by accepting the following: the claims that all the  instances of (ES-prop) and (F-prop) are true, the gap, and classical  logic. Clearly, then, we must give up one of these things. But which? And which can we give up consistently with deflationism? One strategy that is obviously consistent with deflationism is the  rejection of classical logic (perhaps rejecting or restricting the  law of excluded middle, for example). We shall largely ignore this  approach here. Another strategy would be to restrict (ES-prop), so  that it is not asserted that all instances of (ES-prop) are true  (Horwich 1998b). However, there are reasons to be suspicious of such  a restriction. To see this, consider the following two propositions: Both (11) and (12) are generalizations we express with the help of  the truth predicate. And yet both seem to require the truth of all  instances of (ES-prop). In particular, we may use (12) as a way of  acknowledging our agreement with everything the Pope said, even if  some of the propositions he asserted were moral propositions. This  suggests that we need to use a notion of truth according to which  instances of (ES-prop) hold even for moral statements, and even if  they are neither true nor false. A third strategy modifies deflationism by jettisoning the account of  falsity that the deflationist offers, while hanging on to the account of truth. This strategy is a fairly desperate one, however. To begin  with, if we give up the account of falsehood, it is not clear that we have an account of truth. Truth and falsehood are, as we have said, a package deal. Moreover, the deflationary theories of falsity that we  considered are motivated in large part by classical logic.  Presumably, it would be desirable to maintain classical logic if at  all possible, and this means that we should maintain the deflationist account of falsity. Finally, one can generate a problem for the gap  even if we operate without falsity, and only with truth (Rescher  1969). Suppose, again for reductio, that there is a proposition  Q that is neither true nor false. Now, if Q is  neither true nor false, then the proposition that Q is true  will be false. But this means that for at least one instance of the  equivalence schema, one side of the biconditional will be false, and  the other side will be neither true nor false. On all logics that  involve truth-value gaps, however, such a biconditional will be  counted either as false or else as neither true nor false. Either  way, the result is that the equivalence schema is not true in all  instances. A fourth strategy argues that the gap, as we have presented it, is  malformed. According to this strategy, one should not respond to the  phenomena that prompt the gap by suggesting that certain propositions lack truth values; one should rather suggest that certain declarative sentences lack truth values, i.e., because they fail to express  propositions at all. Thus, if we take presupposition failure as our  example, the suggestion is that instead of supposing that the  proposition that the present King of France is bald does not have a truth value if the King of France does not exist, one should  rather suppose that the sentence ‘the present King of France is bald’ does not express a proposition, and therefore fails to  have a truth value. This kind of approach removes any conflict  between the gap and deflationism. The gap says, or implies, that  certain sentences fail to express propositions; deflationism says, or implies, that if those sentences did express propositions,  they would have truth values. But there is clearly no contradiction  in supposing, on the one hand, that a certain sentence fails to  express a proposition and, on the other, that if it did, it would  have a truth value. This strategy for dealing with the gap returns us to the problems we  mentioned earlier concerning which theories of meaning are compatible with deflationism. For example, some have argued that deflationism is incompatible with truth-conditional theories of meaning and so cannot accept that some declarative sentences do not have truth-conditions  or express propositions (e.g. Field 1994a, Armour-Garb 2001). Even if this is true, however, the deflationist can maintain that only  meaningful declarative sentences have truth-conditions or  express a proposition and that a use theory of meaning will  distinguish the meaningful sentences from the meaningless. Still, it  is unclear whether any use theory of meaning can make the appropriate distinctions — for example, whether it can distinguish  ‘The present King of France is bald’ from ‘The  present Prime Minister of Australia is bald’. A fifth strategy is to reject the gap entirely, and to simply agree  that there is no gap that divides either propositions or sentences.  This may initially seem to be an overreaction to the inconsistency of deflationism and the gap; however, what lies behind this strategy is  the thought that it is not clear that the various phenomena that  motivate the gap ought to be regarded as phenomena which involve  failure of truth value, whether of sentences or propositions. In the  case of presupposition failure, for example, it is not clear that the problem is best explained by a failure of certain sentences to have  truth values, or by the presence of conventional or conversational  implicatures that govern utterances of those sentences. The  possibility of a broadly pragmatic account of the phenomena suggests  that one might accommodate the intuitions behind the gap without  supposing that there is a gap in the class of propositions (for an  example, see Stalnaker 1975). Similarly, in the case of vague  propositions, one might adopt epistemicism: the position that vague  words like ‘bald’ in fact have precise extensions, but  that we can never know what these precise extensions are (see  Williamson 1994, Horwich 1998b). Like the previous strategy, however, more work is required to show that this approach is able to account  for the various linguistic phenomena that prompt the gap. A final strategy for dealing with the gap takes seriously the  deflationist idea that attributions of truth to a proposition have  the same semantic value as the propositions to which truth is  attributed. So far we have assumed that attributions of truth to the  proposition Q, where Q lacks a truth value, are  false. However, an alternative approach is to suppose that if  Q lacks a truth value, then both the proposition that  Q is true and the proposition that Q is false lack  truth values too. This allows us to accept that the instances of  (ES-prop) involving propositions that lack truth value are true,  since the two sides of the biconditional will have the same semantic  value. Of course, if we accept the law of excluded middle —  that is, we accept that either Q or not-Q —  then we must also accept that either Q is true or  not-Q is true. Given that, by hypothesis, Q lacks a truth value, this may seem odd. In particular, it is unclear how we  can express the fact that Q lacks a truth value. For we  cannot describe this case by saying that Q is neither true  nor false. To avoid this consequence, we may wish to distinguish two notions of  truth at this point. One notion of truth, call it the weak notion  (Yablo 1985, Field 1994b), is implicitly defined by the instances of  (weak-ES), all of which are asserted to hold. Because all instances of (weak-ES) are true, it is the weak notion  that is required to express (11). In short, weak truth is such that attributions of weak truth to a  truth-bearer have the same semantic value as the truth-bearer itself. In contrast, a strong notion of truth will not make all instances of  (strong-ES) hold. In particular, propositions that lack truth value will falsify  (strong-ES). This strong notion of truth appears to be required if we wish to say that it is neither true that Q nor true that  not-Q. For these sorts of reasons, some have suggested that  ordinary truth-talk vacillates between using a weak and a strong  notion of truth (see Field 1994b, McGee 2005). If this is right, then perhaps deflationists can focus on the weak notion of truth as  primary, and try to define up a strong notion of truth from it and  additional resources consistent with their position (see Field 1994b  for an attempt). There are, then, a number of strategies for dealing with the gap that are prima facie compatible with deflationism. However, in each case  there are reasons to worry about either the plausibility of the  strategy, or about whether, on closer inspection, deflationism will  turn out to be inconsistent with the strategy. One of the major tasks of philosophical logic in the twentieth  century has been to provide a theory of truth that can deal with the  ancient problem of the liar paradox. Consider the following  proposition. If we accept the relevant instance of (ES-prop) for The Liar, and  classical logic, then contradiction quickly follows. Moreover, since  deriving this contradiction does not rely on the supposition that  some proposition is neither true nor false, appealing to a weak  notion of truth will not help with this problem. Indeed, since the  weak notion of truth implies that all instances of (ES-prop) are  true, it is precisely this notion of truth that allows the  contradiction to be derived. A stronger notion of truth that  restricted (ES-prop) in certain ways might be able to avoid the liar  paradox. Partly for this reason, a number of philosophers have recently argued that The Liar poses a special problem for deflationary theories of truth (see Beall and Armour-Garb (eds.) 2005). That is, since it is unclear whether deflationists can appeal to a strong notion of truth, they seem to be at a special disadvantage in dealing with the liar paradox. Moreover, it has been argued that one particular way of motivating a restriction of (ES-prop) is incompatible with deflationism: namely, that paradoxical sentences like The Liar are meaningless, or do not express propositions. (Armour-Garb 2001; but see Beall 2001 for a contrary view.) However, as we mentioned above, not all deflationary theories are  committed to the truth of all instances of (ES-prop). Horwich's  minimal theory of truth, for example, only consists of all the  non-pathological instances of (ES-prop). One possible deflationist  response to The Liar, then, is to simply bar the problematic  instances of (ES-prop) from the theory of truth. There are several  problems with this strategy. For one, by making this ad hoc manoeuvre we lose the ability to explain why the pathological instances of  (ES-prop) are pathological. After all, it is surely something about  the concept of truth, and in particular the role of the relevant  instances of (ES-prop), that explains why the liar paradox arises  (Soames 1999, Gupta 2006). Another problem is that it is very  difficult, if not impossible, to spell out in advance which instances of (ES-prop) are paradoxical (Kripke 1975, McGee 1992, Yablo 1993). A final problem is that it appears we need to assume that the  paradoxical instances of (ES-prop) are true if we are to assert (11)  (Armour-Garb 2004, Gupta 2006). These problems facing accounts that merely restrict the instances of  the equivalence schema suggest an alternative deflationist response  to the liar. For both the fact that The Liar's instance of (ES-prop)  is required to explain its (The Liar's) pathology, and the fact that  we need The Liar's instance of (ES-prop) to assert (11), give us good reason to suppose that even the paradoxical instances of (ES-prop)  are true. Moreover, these reasons hold whether we are deflationists  or inflationists. If this is right, then, since the paradox is  generated merely from the relevant instance of (ES-prop) by classical logic, The Liar poses no special problem for deflationists  (Gupta 2006). And since everyone's problem is no one's, the liar  paradox cannot be used against deflationists. This defence of  deflationism can be bolstered by noting that, like inflationists,  deflationists can try to deal with the liar paradox by modifying  classical logic (Field 2003), by adopting epistemicism (Restall  2006), or by adopting a revision theory (Gupta and Belnap 1993). (See also Maudlin 2004.) However, there is a further line of argument that suggests there is a special problem for deflationists in this vicinity. The ideal theory  of truth will be both consistent (e.g. avoids the liar paradox) and  adequate (e.g. allows us to derive all the essential laws of truth,  like (11)). Yet it has been recently argued that even if  deflationists can give a consistent theory of truth, they cannot  provide an adequate theory. The argument for this conclusion turns on the notion of a conservative extension of a theory. Informally, a  conservative extension of a theory is one that does not allow us to  prove any sentences that couldn't be proved from the original,  unextended theory. More formally, and applied to theories of truth, a truth theory, Tr is conservative over some theory  T formulated in language L if and only if for every sentence φ of L in which the truth predicate doesn't occur, if Tr ∪ L  ⊢  φ, then L  ⊢  φ. As is well known, certain truth theories are conservative over arithmetic — e.g. theories that implicitly define truth using only the instances of (ES-prop) — and certain truth theories are not — e.g. Tarski's compositional theory (Tarski 1944).  Specifically, the addition of certain truth theories allows us to prove that arithmetic is consistent, something we famously can't do if we are confined to arithmetic itself. Now, it has recently been argued (a) that conservative truth theories are inadequate and (b) deflationists are committed to conservative  truth theories (Shapiro 1998, Ketland 1999). The details of the  arguments for (a) are complicated and we will pass over them here  (but see Field 1999 for criticism). To get a flavour of the arguments for (b), consider Shapiro's rhetorical question: ‘How thin can  the notion of arithmetic truth be, if by invoking it we can learn  more about the natural numbers?’ Shapiro is surely right to  press deflationists on their frequent claims that truth is 'thin' or  'insubstantial'. It might also be a worry for deflationists if any  adequate truth theory allowed us to derive non-logical truths, given  the common deflationist assertion that truth is a logical property.  On the other hand, deflationists themselves insist that truth is an  expressively useful device, and so they cannot be faulted merely for  promoting a theory of truth that allows us to say more about matters  not involving truth. Whether there is more of a worry for  deflationists in the non-conservativeness of certain truth-theories  depends on subtle questions about what sort of axioms count as  essential laws of truth and whether all conservative truth theories  are inadequate (Shapiro 1998, Field 1999, Ketland 1999). Perhaps most importantly, though, the debate over conservativeness highlights how  unclear we are about the commitments of deflationism. It is commonly said that our beliefs and assertions aim at truth. The idea here, of course, is not that our beliefs and assertions are  always true in a statistical sense, or even that they are mostly  true. The idea is rather that truth is a norm of assertion.  This fact about assertion and truth has often been seen to suggest  that deflationism must be false. However, the felt contradiction  between normativity and deflationism is difficult to make precise. The first thing to say is that there is certainly a sense in which  deflationism is not inconsistent with the idea that truth is a norm  of assertion. To illustrate this, notice that we can obtain an  intuitive understanding of the content of this idea without  mentioning truth at all, so long as we focus on a particular case.  Suppose for whatever reason that Mary sincerely believes that snow is green, has good evidence for this belief, and on the basis of this  belief and evidence asserts that snow is green. We might say that  there is a norm of assertion which implies that Mary is in this case  open to criticism. After all, since snow is evidently not green,  there must be something incorrect or defective  about Mary's assertion that it is. It is this incorrection or  defectiveness that the idea that truth is a norm of assertion is  trying to capture. But now let us see if we can give a general statement of the norm  that lies behind this particular case. The problem of providing a  general statement seems to be difficult, and for reasons that by now  should be familiar. To state the norm in general we would need to be  able to do something we cannot really do, namely, to complete an  infinite conjunction of something like the following form: Given the equivalence schema (F-prop*) provided by the deflationary theory of falsity, however, this infinite conjunction can be reformulated as: In turn, this reformulated infinite conjunction can be reformulated as a statement whose universal quantifier ranges over propositions: Or, to put it as some philosophers might: For after all, if truth is a norm of assertion, then, if you assert something false, you are open to criticism. In short, then, deflationists are certainly not denying that truth is a norm of assertion; on the contrary, the concept of truth is required to state that very generalization. If the problem of normativity is not the straightforward one that  deflationists cannot account for the idea that truth is a norm of  assertion, what is the problem? Crispin Wright argues that the  problem is not so much that deflationists cannot account for  normativity; rather, he suggests that the problem is twofold: first,  that any theory of truth that does account for normativity  is ipso facto not a deflationary theory properly so-called,  and second, that any theory of truth which employs the equivalence  schemas can account for normativity (Wright 1992; and see Price 1998  for discussion). The result is that, since most contemporary  varieties of deflationism evidently employ the equivalence schemas,  most contemporary varieties of deflationism are not varieties of  deflationism properly so-called. Wright's objection from normativity is a difficult one to assess. For one thing, it is difficult to find Wright's reason for supposing that the equivalence schemas play such a central role in the explanation  of normativity. As we have seen, the equivalence schemas are crucial  in providing a general statement of the idea that truth is a norm of  assertion, but there seems for all that no internal connection  between truth and the norm in question, and thus no internal connection between the equivalence schemas and that norm (cf. Price  1998). Nor is it clear what role normativity plays in the distinction between an inflationary and a deflationary theory of truth. Certainly it is not good enough to simply define deflationism so that  any deflationary theory cannot account for normativity. Of course, it is a consequence of a definition of this sort that a theory of truth  is either inflationary or false; but then again, no deflationist will accept the definition. Whatever one thinks of the details of Wright's objection, however, it does have far-reaching consequences for deflationism about truth. What the objection forces us to consider is the possibility that there is no very clear distinction between an inflationary and a deflationary theory of truth. Indeed, this possibility — that there is no clear inflationary/deflationary distinction — is the topic of the final objection to deflationism that we will discuss. The final objection begins by drawing attention to a little known doctrine about truth that G.E. Moore held at the beginning of the century. Richard Cartwright describes the view as follows: “a true proposition is one that has a certain simple unanalyzable property, and a false proposition is one that lacks the property” (1987, p. 73).  This doctrine about truth is, of course, to be understood as the analogue for truth of the doctrine that Moore held about good, namely that good is a simple, unanalyzable quality. The problem that this Moorean view about truth presents for the  deflationary theory might best be expressed in the form of a  question: what is the difference between the Moorean view and  deflationism? Of course, there is a sense in which the flavour of the Moorean view is very different from the flavour of the deflationist  theory about truth. After all, what could be more inflationary than  thinking that truth is a property of a proposition that is  unanalyzable? Certainly Moore's view about good has been viewed in  this light. However, the fact that one view has a different flavour  from another does not mean that, at bottom, they are not the same  view. One might perhaps suggest that, according to the deflationary  theory, the concept of truth has an important logical role, i.e., to  capture generalizations. However, this doesn't really answer our  question. For one thing, it isn't clear that Moore's notion might not also capture generalizations. For another, the idea that the  deflationary concept of truth plays an important logical role doesn't distinguish the metaphysics of deflationism from the metaphysics of  the Moorean view; and it is the metaphysics of the matter that the  present objection really brings into focus. Alternatively, one might  suggest that the distinction between truth according to deflationism  and truth according to Moore's view is the distinction between having a simple unanalyzable nature, and not having a nature at all.  However, what is that distinction? It is certainly not obvious that  there is any distinction between having a nature about which nothing  can be said and having no nature at all. The problem is particularly acute in light of the fact that  deflationism has often been discussed in the context of various  claims about reductionism. In many discussions of deflationism, for  example, the opponent is assumed to be a particular version of a  correspondence theory that attempts to reduce the correspondence  relation to certain relations of causation (Field 1986 is a good  example). However, it should be noted that this kind of view is also  opposed to the kind of position that takes semantic facts-such as a  proposition's being true-as primitive (Field 1972 is a good example). And the problem that we are considering for deflationism is that  these two views are not simply identical in being opposed to the kind of view that explains correspondence in terms of causation: it is  that they are identical simpliciter. The suggestion, in  short, is that deflationism is identical to what initially seems to  be its complete opposite, Moorean inflationism. The decision to be an inflationist or a deflationist about truth has been called “the biggest decision a theorist of truth must make” (Boghossian 1990). Certainly this is true at an intuitive level. But it is sobering also to realize that it is not exactly clear what this decision amounts to when subjected to philosophical scrutiny. And this suggests that there is still a lot of work to be done before we can arrive at a final evaluation of the deflationary theory of truth.