 Historically, neuroscientific discoveries exerted little influence on the details of materialist philosophies of mind. The “neuroscientific milieu” of the past half-century has made it harder for philosophers to adopt substantive dualisms about mind. But even the “type-type” or “central state” identity theories that rose to brief prominence in the late 1950s (Place 1956; Smart 1959) drew upon few actual details of the emerging neurosciences. Recall the favorite early example of a psychoneural identity claim: “pain is identical to C-fiber firing”. The “C-fibers” turned out to be related to only a single aspect of pain transmission (Hardcastle 1997). Early identity theorists did not emphasize psychoneural identity hypotheses. Their “neuro” terms were admittedly placeholders for concepts from future neuroscience. Their arguments and motivations were philosophical, even if the ultimate justification of the program was held to be empirical. The apology offered by early identity theorists for ignoring scientific details was that the neuroscience at that time was too nascent to provide any plausible identities. But potential identities were afoot. David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel’s (1962) electrophysiological demonstrations of the receptive field properties of visual neurons had been reported with great fanfare. Using their techniques, neurophysiologists began discovering neurons throughout visual cortex responsive to increasingly abstract features of visual stimuli: from edges to motion direction to colors to properties of faces and hands. More notably, Donald Hebb had published The Organization of Behavior (1949) more than a decade earlier. He had offered detailed explanations of psychological phenomena in terms of neural mechanisms and anatomical circuits. His psychological explananda included features of perception, learning, memory, and even emotional disorders. He offered these explanations as potential identities. (See the Introduction to his 1949). One philosopher who did take note of some available neuroscientific detail at the time was Barbara Von Eckardt Klein (Von Eckardt Klein 1975). She discussed the identity theory with respect to sensations of touch and pressure, and incorporated then-current hypotheses about neural coding of sensation modality, intensity, duration, and location as theorized by Mountcastle, Libet, and Jasper. Yet she was a glaring exception. By and large, available neuroscience at the time was ignored by both philosophical friends and foes of early identity theories. Philosophical indifference to neuroscientific detail became “principled” with the rise and prominence of functionalism in the 1970s. The functionalists’ favorite argument was based on multiple realizability: a given mental state or event can be realized in a wide variety of physical types (Putnam 1967; Fodor 1974). Consequently, a detailed understanding of one type of realizing physical system (e.g., brains) will not shed light on the fundamental nature of mind. Psychology is thus autonomous from any science of one of its possible physical realizers (see the  entry on multiple realizability  in this Encyclopedia). Instead of neuroscience, scientifically-minded philosophers influenced by functionalism sought evidence and inspiration from cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence. These disciplines abstract away from underlying physical mechanisms and emphasize the “information-bearing” properties and capacities of representations (Haugeland 1985). At this same time, however, neuroscience was delving directly into cognition, especially learning and memory. For example, Eric Kandel (1976) proposed presynaptic mechanisms governing transmitter release rate as a cell-biological explanation of simple forms of associative learning. With Robert Hawkins (Hawkins and Kandel 1984) he demonstrated how cognitivist aspects of associative learning (e.g., blocking, second-order conditioning, overshadowing) could be explained cell-biologically by sequences and combinations of these basic forms implemented in higher neural anatomies. Working on the post-synaptic side, neuroscientists began unraveling the cellular mechanisms of long term potentiation (LTP; Bliss and Lomo 1973). Physiological psychologists quickly noted its explanatory potential for various forms of learning and  memory.[1]  Yet few “materialist” philosophers paid any attention. Why should they? Most were convinced functionalists. They believed that the “implementation level” details might be important to the clinician, but were irrelevant to the theorist of mind. A major turning point in philosophers’ interest in neuroscience came with the publication of Patricia Churchland’s Neurophilosophy (1986). The Churchlands (Patricia and Paul) were already notorious for advocating eliminative materialism (see the next section). In her (1986) book, Churchland distilled eliminativist arguments of the past decade, unified the pieces of the philosophy of science underlying them, and sandwiched the philosophy between a five-chapter introduction to neuroscience and a 70-page chapter on three then-current theories of brain function. She was unapologetic about her intent. She was introducing philosophy of science to neuroscientists and neuroscience to philosophers. Nothing could be more obvious, she insisted, than the relevance of empirical facts about how the brain works to concerns in the philosophy of mind. Her term for this interdisciplinary method was “co-evolution” (borrowed from biology). This method seeks resources and ideas from anywhere on the theory hierarchy above or below the question at issue. Standing on the shoulders of philosophers like Quine and Sellars, Churchland insisted that specifying some point where neuroscience ends and philosophy of science begins is hopeless because the boundaries are poorly defined. Neurophilosophers would pick and choose resources from both disciplines as they saw fit. Three themes predominated Churchland’s philosophical discussion: developing an alternative to the logical empiricist theory of intertheoretic reduction; responding to property-dualistic arguments based on subjectivity and sensory qualia; and responding to anti-reductionist multiple realizability arguments. These projects remained central to neurophilosophy for more than a decade after Churchland’s book appeared. John Bickle (1998) extended the principal insight of Clifford Hooker’s (1981a,b,c) post-empiricist theory of intertheoretic reduction. He quantified key notions using a model-theoretic account of theory structure adapted from the structuralist program in philosophy of science (Balzer, Moulines, and Sneed 1987). He also made explicit a form of argument to draw ontological conclusions (cross-theoretic identities, revisions, or eliminations) from the nature of the intertheoretic reduction relations obtaining in specific cases. For example, it is routinely concluded that visible light, a theoretical posit of optics, is electromagnetic radiation within specified wavelengths, a theoretical posit of electromagnetism; in this case, a cross-theoretic ontological identity. It is also routine to conclude that phlogiston does not exist: an elimination of a kind from our scientific ontology. Bickle explicated the nature of the reduction relation in a specific case using a semi-formal account of “intertheoretic approximation” inspired by structuralist results. Paul Churchland (1996) carried on the attack on property-dualistic arguments for the irreducibility of conscious experience and sensory qualia. He argued that acquiring some knowledge of existing sensory neuroscience increases one’s ability to “imagine” or “conceive of” a comprehensive neurobiological explanation of consciousness. He defended this conclusion using a characteristically imaginative thought-experiment based on the history of optics and electromagnetism. Finally, criticisms of the multiple realizability argument flourish—and are challenged—to the present day. Although the multiple realizability argument remains influential among nonreductive physicalists, it no longer commands the near-universal acceptance it once did. Replies to the multiple realizability argument based on neuroscientific details have appeared. For example, William Bechtel and Jennifer Mundale (1999) argue that neuroscientists use psychological criteria in brain mapping studies. This fact undercuts the likelihood that psychological kinds are multiply realized (for a review of recent developments see the  entry on multiple realizability  in this Encyclopedia).