 What neuroscience has now discovered about the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neural conductance and transmission is spectacular. These results constitute one of the crowning achievements of scientific inquiry. (For those in doubt, simply peruse for five minutes a recent volume of Society for Neuroscience Abstracts.) Less comprehensive, yet still spectacular, are discoveries at “higher” levels of neuroscience: circuits, networks, and systems. All this is a natural outcome of increasing scientific specialization. We develop the technology, the experimental techniques, and ultimately the experimental results-driven theories within specific disciplines to push forward our understanding. Still, a crucial aspect of the total picture sometimes gets neglected: the relationship between the levels, the “glue” that binds knowledge of neuron activity to subcellular and molecular mechanisms “below”, and to circuit, network, and systems activity patterns “above”. This problem is especially glaring when we try to relate “cognitivist” psychological theories, postulating information-bearing representations and processes operating over their contents, to neuronal activities. “Co-evolution” between these explanatory levels still seems more a distant dream than an operative methodology guiding day-to-day scientific research. It is here that some philosophers and neuroscientists turned to computational methods (Churchland and Sejnowski 1992). One hope was that the way computational models have functioned in more developed sciences, like in physics, might provide a useful model. One computational resource that has usefully been applied in more developed sciences to similar “cross-level” concerns are dynamical systems. Global phenomena, such as large-scale meteorological patterns, have been usefully addressed as dynamical, nonlinear, and often chaotic interactions between lower-level physical phenomena. Addressing the interlocking levels of theory and explanation in the mind/brain using computational resources that have worked to bridge levels in more mature sciences might yield comparable results. This methodology is necessarily interdisciplinary, drawing on resources and researchers from a variety of levels, including higher ones like experimental psychology, artificial intelligence, and philosophy of science. The use of computational methods in neuroscience itself is not new. Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz (1952) incorporated values of voltage-dependent sodium and potassium conductance they had measured experimentally in the squid giant axon into an equation from physics describing the time evolution of a first-order kinetic process. This equation enabled them to calculate best-fit curves for modeled conductance versus time data that reproduced the changing membrane potential over time when action potentials were generated. Also using equations borrowed from physics, Rall (1959) developed the cable model of dendrites. This model provided an account of how the various inputs from across the dendritic tree interact temporally and spatially to determine the input-output properties of single neurons. It remains influential today, and was incorporated into the GENESIS software for programming neurally realistic networks (Bower and Beeman 1995; see discussion in  section 2 above).  David Sparks and his colleagues showed that a vector-averaging model of activity in neurons of superior colliculi correctly predicts experimental results about the amplitude and direction of saccadic eye movements (Lee, Rohrer, and Sparks 1988). Working with a more sophisticated mathematical model, Apostolos Georgopoulos and his colleagues predicted direction and amplitude of hand and arm movements based on averaged activity of 224 cells in motor cortex. Their predictions were borne out under a variety of experimental tests (Georgopoulos, Schwartz, and Kettner 1986). We mention these particular studies only because these are ones with which we are familiar. No doubt we could multiply examples of the fruitful interaction of computational and experimental methods in neuroscience easily by one-hundred-fold. Many of these extend back before “computational neuroscience” was a recognized research endeavor. We’ve already seen one example, the vector transformation account of neural representation and computation, once under active development in cognitive neuroscience (see  section 2 above).  Other approaches using “cognitivist” resources were, and continue to be,  pursued.[16]  Some of these projects draw upon “cognitivist” characterizations of the phenomena to be explained. Some exploit “cognitivist” experimental techniques and methodologies. Some even attempt to derive “cognitivist” explanations from cell-biological processes (e.g., Hawkins and Kandel 1984). As Stephen Kosslyn (1997) put it, cognitive neuroscientists employ the “information processing” view of the mind characteristic of cognitivism without trying to separate it from theories of brain mechanisms. Such an endeavor calls for an interdisciplinary community willing to communicate the relevant portions of the mountain of detail gathered in individual disciplines with interested nonspecialists. This requires more than people willing to confer with others working at related levels, but also researchers trained explicitly in the methods and factual details of a variety of disciplines. This is a daunting need, but it offers hope to philosophers wishing to contribute to actual neuroscience. Thinkers trained in both the “synoptic vision” afforded by philosophy, and the scientific and experimental basis of a genuine (graduate-level) science would be ideally equipped for this task. Recognition of this potential niche was slow to dawn on graduate programs in philosophy, but a few programs have taken steps to fill it (see, e.g.,  Other Internet Resources  below). However, one glaring shortcoming remains. Given philosophers’ training and interests, “higher-level” neurosciences—networks, cognitive, systems, and the fields of computational neuroscience which ally with these—tend to attract the most philosophical attention. As natural as this focus might be, it can lead philosophers to a misleading picture of neuroscience. Neurobiology remains focused on cellular and molecular mechanisms of neuronal activity, and allies with the kind of behavioral neuroscience that works with animal models. This is still how a majority of members of the Society for Neuroscience, now more than 37,000 members strong, classify their own research; this is where the majority of grant money for research goes; and these are the areas whose experimental publications most often appear in the most highly cited scientific journals. (The link to the Society for Neuroscience’s web site in  Other Internet Resources below  leads to a wealth of data on these numbers; see especially the Publications section.) Yet philosophers have tended not to pay much attention to cellular and molecular neuroscience. Fortunately this seems to be changing, as we will document in sections 7 and 8 below. Still, the preponderant attention philosophers pay to cognitive/systems/computational neuroscience obscures the wetlab experiment-driven focus of ongoing neurobiology.