 We have surveyed two ways of understanding Frege’s objections to Hilbert’s techniques for proving consistency and independence. The first takes Frege to be fundamentally mistaken, with the error located in his failure to appreciate the connection between the satisfiability of a set of reinterpretable sentences and the associated independence/consistency claims. The second takes Frege to be fundamentally correct in the sense that (i) he understands the consistency and independence of thoughts to turn not just on the surface syntax of the sentences that express them but also on the contents of the simple terms used in their expression, and (ii) consistency and independence, so understood, are not demonstrable in Hilbert’s manner. Neither of these interpretive options is entirely unproblematic. An important difficulty with the first is its attribution to Frege of a severe degree of confusion about the force of Hilbert’s re-interpretations, which is arguably in some tension with the fact that, generally speaking, Frege’s account of Hilbert’s methodological procedure in FG is considerably clearer than is Hilbert’s own. A further source of difficulty is that the understanding of independence attributed on this account to Frege is in tension with the understanding of logical entailment that figures centrally in his logicist work, an understanding on which the contents of mathematical terms can be crucial to questions of logical entailment. The second interpretation, though more charitable to Frege, arguably suffers from the lack of explicit mention by Frege of the relevance of conceptual analysis to questions of consistency and independence. A final source of potential difficulty for any account of Frege’s views of independence and consistency is the very interesting Part (iii) of the 1906 “Foundations of Geometry” essay. The importance of that text, and the interpretive difficulties it poses, can be sketched as follows. The 1906 “Foundations of Geometry” essay is primarily a re-statement of Frege’s earlier objections (discussed above) to Hilbert’s treatment of consistency and independence. After a rehearsal of those objections, Frege turns in Part iii to the problem of giving a positive method for proving independence. How, he asks, might one prove a given thought independent of a collection of thoughts? In answer, Frege provides a sketch of a potential method, and ends the discussion by noting that the method sketched is still incomplete, and that it faces some difficulties. Despite the obvious incompleteness, Frege never (as far as we can tell) returns to the proposal, and would seem in the end to have found it unsatisfactory. That he thought it unsatisfactory in principle is indicated by his claim four years later, in a note to Jourdain, that the unprovability of the parallels axiom cannot be proven (see Frege 1980: 183n). That is, he would seem by 1910 to hold that there is no systematic method for proving  independence.[11] The 1906 proposal itself can be outlined as follows. Suppose, says Frege, that we have a collection C of sentences each of which expresses a determinate thought, and a sentence S that similarly expresses a determinate thought. The heart of the proposed method for proving the independence of the S-thought from the C-thoughts is that we employ a mapping μ of terms to terms (and hence also of sentences to sentences) that preserves syntactic type (mapping names to names, one-place predicates to one-place predicates, etc.) and maps ’logical’ terms to themselves. Then: the S-thought is independent of the C-thoughts if μ maps S to a false sentence while mapping all the members of C to true sentences. (For discussion and development of Frege’s proposal, see Antonelli & May 2000, Eder 2016. For discussion of Frege’s reasons for rejecting the proposal, see Ricketts 1997, Eder 2013, Blanchette 2014.) The first intriguing thing about the proposal is its striking similarity to Hilbert’s method. Assuming Frege’s language to be rich enough to include terms for all of the objects, functions and sets that Hilbert might use in reinterpretations, there will arguably be a mapping of the kind Frege describes if and only if there is a reinterpretation of the kind Hilbert uses to show (his version of) independence: where Hilbert’s reinterpretation provides a term t with new content, Frege’s method would simply map t to a new term with that very content. And this would mean that, despite all of the objections raised by Frege, Hilbert’s method would in the end suffice to demonstrate what Frege regards as the independence of thoughts. If this is correct, then we have reason to doubt any interpretation of Frege on which his rejection of Hilbert’s method is justified. The central reasons one might doubt the strong equivalence just suggested between Hilbert’s method and Frege’s proposal are that (i) it is not clear just what kind of language Frege has in mind, and (ii) it is not clear whether the class of terms Frege would count as “logical”, i.e., the class whose members μ must map to themselves, is the same as the class of terms that Hilbert would count as having a fixed interpretation. If Frege’s class of fixed terms is wider than is Hilbert’s, and/or Frege’s language lacks some of the terminology of Hilbert’s, then a demonstration of independence in Hilbert’s sense will not imply the existence of a mapping demonstrating independence in Frege’s sense. One way to think of the crucial question is as the question whether terms like “number” or “between”, terms that Frege treats as susceptible to conceptual analysis, will be allowed in the language that Frege is concerned with (as opposed, say, to requiring the language to contain only “fully-analyzed” terms), and whether such terms will be amongst those that μ maps to arbitrary new terminology. Frege himself notes the importance of the second terminological demarcation problem just raised, i.e., the problem of determining which terms are mapped to themselves, and remarks that this problem is one that would need to be addressed in order to turn his sketch into a workable strategy. Because he never answers the question of the fixed terminology or of the kind of language in question, Frege’s proposal is not sufficiently determinate for a clear comparison with Hilbert’s. We are left, then, with the interpretive issue of making sense of Frege’s proposal of a method and subsequent apparent repudiation of it, while recognizing the incomplete nature of that proposal. (For further discussion of the 1906 text, see: Ricketts 1997, Tappenden 2000, Blanchette 2014.)