 Perhaps because of the widespread interest in deflationism, the  theory has received many different formulations. The result is that  there is not so much a deflationary theory of truth as many. In recent times, however, the deflationary theory has most often been presented with the help of a schema, which is sometimes called  the equivalence schema: In this schema angle brackets indicate an appropriate name-forming  device, e.g. quotation marks or ‘the proposition that  …’, and occurrences of ‘p’ are  replaced with sentences to yield instances of the schema. With the  help of (ES), we can formulate deflationism as the view, roughly,  that the instances of this schema capture everything significant that can be said about truth. Theories which depart from deflationism deny that the equivalence schema tells us the whole truth about truth.  Since such theories add to the equivalence schema, they are often  called inflationary theories of truth. (The equivalence schema is  associated with Alfred Tarski (1944, 1958), but it is far from  obvious that Tarski was any sort of deflationist. We will largely set Tarski aside here.) Formulated in this way, deflationism does not give an  explicit definition of truth, for (ES) is not a definition  of anything. Indeed, some deflationists (most notably Horwich 1998b)  do not provide an explicit definition of truth at all. Instead, they  provide an explicit definition of having the concept of truth. To be  more precise, the suggestion is that someone has the concept of truth just in case he or she is disposed to accept all (noncontroversial)  instances of the equivalence schema, i.e., every sentence of the form ‘  is true if and only if p’  that is not paradoxical or in some other way deviant. Of course, such deflationists may think that, in saying something about what it is to have the concept of truth, they have told us what the concept of  truth is. But the latter is a by-product of the former; for this  reason, we can say that these deflationists are proposing an implicit definition of the concept of truth. Are there versions of deflationism, or positions allied to  deflationism, which do not employ the equivalence schema or some  similar device? Yes, but we shall mention them here only to set them  aside. One such view — which may be called  expressivism — is the analogue of emotivism in ethics. (This view of truth is often associated with Strawson 1950, though  the attribution is a difficult one.) According to emotivism, at least in one of its most traditional forms, utterances of the form  ‘torture is wrong’ do not, despite appearances, predicate ‘is wrong’ of torture; rather utterances of  ‘torture is wrong’ merely indicate a negative attitude on the part of the speaker toward torture. Expressivism is the parallel  position about truth. According to expressivism, utterances of the  form ‘S is true’ do not, despite appearances,  predicate ‘is true’ of S; rather  ‘S is true’ merely indicates preparedness on the part of the speaker to assert S. Another such view is the prosentential theory of truth  advanced by Dorothy Grover (see Grover, Camp and Belnap 1973, and  Grover 1992) . According to this theory, sentences formed with the  predicate ‘is true’ are prosentences, where a  prosentence is a device for achieving anaphoric cross-reference to  sentences uttered previously in a conversation, just as pronouns are  devices for achieving anaphoric cross-reference to names uttered  previously in a conversation. According to the prosentential theory,  for example, just as in we interpret ‘she’ as a pronoun anaphorically dependent on ‘Mary’, so too in we interpret ‘That is true’ as a prosentence anaphorically dependent on ‘Snow is white’. Expressivism and the prosentential theory are close cousins of  deflationism, and, in some uses of the term, might reasonably be  called deflationary. However, they are also sufficiently different  from those versions of deflationism that utilize the equivalence  schema to be set aside here. The important difference between  expressivism and the prosentential theory on the one hand, and  deflationism as we are understanding it on the other, concerns the  logical structure of sentences such as ‘S is  true’. For the deflationist, the structure of such sentences is very straightforward: ‘S is true’  predicates the property expressed by ‘is true’ of the  thing denoted by ‘S’. We might express this by  saying that, according to deflationism, ‘S is  true’ says of S that it is true, just as  ‘apples are red’ says, of apples, that they are  red or ‘John sleeps’ says, of John, that he  sleeps. Both expressivism and the prosentential theory deny this,  though for different reasons. According to expressivism,  ‘S is true’ is properly interpreted not even of  subject-predicate form; rather it has the structure ‘Hooray to  S’. Obviously, therefore, it does not say, of S, that it is true. According to prosententialism, by  contrast, while ‘S is true’ has a  subject-predicate structure, it would still be mistaken to interpret  it as being about S. For consider: according to the  prosentential theory, ‘S is true’ is a  prosentence which stands in for the sentence denoted by S  just as ‘she’ in (1) is a pronoun which stands in for the name ‘Mary’. But we do not say that ‘she’ in  (1) is about the name ‘Mary’; similarly,  according to the prosentential theory, we should not say that  ‘S is true’ is about S. To suppose  otherwise would be to misconstrue the nature of anaphora.