 Consciousness re-emerged over the past three decades as a topic of research focus in philosophy of mind, and in the cognitive and brain sciences. Instead of ignoring it, many physicalists sought to explain it (Dennett 1991). Here we focus exclusively on ways that neuroscientific discoveries have impacted philosophical debates about the nature of consciousness and its relation to physical mechanisms. (See links to other entries in this encyclopedia below in  Related Entries  for broader discussions about consciousness and physicalism.) Thomas Nagel (1974) argued famously that conscious experience is subjective, and thus permanently recalcitrant to objective scientific understanding. He invited us to ponder “what it is like to be a bat” and urged the intuitive judgment that no amount of physical-scientific knowledge, including neuroscientific, supplies a complete answer. Nagel’s intuition pump has generated extensive philosophical discussion. At least two well-known replies made direct appeal to neurophysiology. John Biro (1991) suggested that part of the intuition pumped by Nagel, that bat experience is substantially different from human experience, presupposes systematic relations between physiology and phenomenology. Kathleen Akins (1993a) delved deeper into existing knowledge of bat physiology and reports much that is pertinent to Nagel’s question. She argued that many of the questions about bat subjective experience that we still consider open hinge on questions that remain unanswered about neuroscientific details. One example of the latter is the function of various cortical activity profiles in the active bat. David Chalmers (1996) famously argued that any possible brain-process account of consciousness will leave open an “explanatory gap” between the brain process and properties of the conscious  experience.[10]  This is because no brain-process theory can answer the “hard” question: Why should that particular brain process give rise to that particular conscious experience? We can always imagine (“conceive of”) a universe populated by creatures having those brain processes but completely lacking conscious experience. A theory of consciousness requires an explanation of how and why some brain process causes a conscious experience, replete with all the features we experience. The fact that the hard question remains unanswered shows that we will probably never get a complete explanation of consciousness at the level of neural mechanism. Paul and Patricia Churchland (1997) offered the following diagnosis and reply. Chalmers offers a conceptual argument, based on our ability to imagine creatures possessing active brains like ours but wholly lacking in conscious experiences. But the more one learns about how the brain produces conscious experience—and such a literature has emerged (for some early work, see Gazzaniga 1995)—the harder it becomes to imagine a universe consisting of creatures with brain processes like ours but lacking consciousness. This is not just bare assertion. The Churchlands appeal to some neurobiological detail. For example, Paul Churchland (1995) develops a neuroscientific account of consciousness based on recurrent connections between thalamic nuclei, particularly between “diffusely projecting” nuclei like the intralaminar nuclei and the  cortex.[11]  Churchland argues that thalamocortical recurrency accounts for the selective features of consciousness, for the effects of short-term memory on conscious experience, for vivid dreaming during REM (rapid-eye movement) sleep, and other “core” features of conscious experience. In other words, the Churchlands are claiming that when one learns about activity patterns in these recurrent circuits, one can no longer “imagine” or “conceive of” this activity occurring without these core features of conscious experience occurring. (Other than just mouthing the expression, “I am now imagining activity in these circuits without selective attention/the effects of short-term memory/vivid dreaming/…”). A second focus of skeptical arguments about a complete neuroscientific explanation of consciousness is on sensory qualia: the introspectable qualitative aspects of sensory experience, the features by which subjects discern similarities and differences among their experiences. The colors of visual sensations are a philosopher’s favorite example. One famous puzzle about color qualia is the alleged conceivability of spectral inversions. Many philosophers claim that it is conceptually possible (if perhaps physically impossible) for two humans not to differ neurophysiologically, while the color that fire engines and tomatoes appear to have to one subject is the color that grass and frogs appear to have to the other (and vice versa). A large amount of neuroscientifically-informed philosophy has addressed this question. (C.L. Hardin 1988 and Austen Clark 1993 are noteworthy examples.) A related area where neurophilosophical considerations have emerged concerns the metaphysics of colors themselves (rather than color experiences). A longstanding philosophical dispute is whether colors are objective properties existing external to perceivers or rather identifiable as or dependent upon minds or nervous systems. Some neuroscientific work on this problem begins with characteristics of color experiences: for example, that color similarity judgments produce color orderings that align on a circle (Clark 1993). With this resource, one can seek mappings of phenomenology onto environmental or physiological regularities. Identifying colors with particular frequencies of electromagnetic radiation does not preserve the structure of the hue circle, whereas identifying colors with activity in opponent processing neurons does. Such a tidbit is not decisive for the color objectivist-subjectivist debate, but it does convey the type of neurophilosophical work being done on traditional metaphysical issues beyond the philosophy of mind. (For more details on these issues, see the  entry on color  in this Encyclopedia.) We saw in the discussion of Hardcastle (1997) two sections above that neurophilosophers have entered disputes about the nature and methodological import of pain experiences. Two decades earlier, Dan Dennett (1978) took up the question of whether it is possible to build a computer that feels pain. He compares and notes tension between neurophysiological discoveries and common sense intuitions about pain experience. He suspects that the incommensurability between scientific and common sense views is due to incoherence in the latter. His attitude is wait-and-see. But foreshadowing Churchland’s reply to Chalmers, Dennett favors scientific investigations over conceivability-based philosophical arguments. Neurological deficits have attracted philosophers interested in consciousness. For nearly fifty years philosophers have debated implications for the unity of the self of the Nobel Prize-winning experiments with commissurotomy patients who, for clinical reasons, had their corpus callosum surgically ablated (Nagel  1971).[12]  The corpus callosum is the huge bundle of axons connecting neurons across the left and right mammalian cerebral hemispheres. In carefully controlled experiments, commissurotomy patients seemingly display two dissociable “seats” of consciousness. Elizabeth Schechter (2018) has recently greatly updated philosophical treatment of the scientific details of these “split-brain” patients, including their own experiential reports, and has traced implications for our understanding of the self. In chapter 5 of her (1986) book, Patricia Churchland extended both the range and philosophical implications of neurological deficits. One deficit she discusses in detail is blindsight. Some patients with lesions to primary visual cortex report being unable to see items in regions of their visual fields, yet perform far better than chance in forced guess trials about stimuli in those regions. A variety of scientific and philosophical interpretations have been offered. Ned Block (1995) worried that many of these interpretations conflate distinct notions of consciousness. He labels these notions “phenomenal consciousness” (“P-consciousness”) and “access consciousness” (“A-consciousness”). The former is the “what it is like”-ness of conscious experiences. The latter is the availability of representational content to self-initiated action and speech. Block argued that P-consciousness is not always representational, whereas A-consciousness is. Dennett (1991, 1995) and Tye (1993) are skeptical of non-representational analyses of consciousness in general. They provide accounts of blindsight that do not depend on Block’s distinction. We break off our brief overview of neurophilosophical work on consciousness here. Many other topics are worth neurophilosophical pursuit. We mentioned commissurotomy and the unity of consciousness and the self, which continues to generate discussion. Qualia beyond those of color and pain experiences quickly attracted neurophilosophical attention (Akins 1993a,b, 1996; Austen Clark 1993), as did self-consciousness (Bermúdez 1998).