 Ockham is rightly regarded as one of the most significant logicians of the Middle Ages. Nevertheless, his originality and influence should not be exaggerated. For all his deserved reputation, his logical views are sometimes  derivative[11]  and occasionally very  idiosyncratic.[12] Logic, for Ockham, is crucial to the advancement of knowledge. In the “Prefatory Letter” to his Summa of Logic, for example, he praises it in striking language: Ockham’s main logical writings consist of a series of commentaries (or “expositions”) on Aristotle’s and Porphyry’s logical works, plus his own Summa of Logic, his major work in the field. His Treatise on Predestination contains an influential theory on the logic of future contingent propositions, and other works as well include occasional discussions of logical topics, notably his Quodlibets. Ockham’s Summa of Logic is divided into three parts, with the third part subdivided into four subparts. Part I divides language, in accordance with Aristotle’s On Interpretation (1, 16a3–8, as influenced by Boethius’s interpretation), into written, spoken and mental language, with the written kind dependent on the spoken, and the spoken on mental language. Mental language, the language of thought, is thus the most primitive and basic level of language. Part I goes on to lay out a fairly detailed theory of terms, including the distinctions between (a) categorematic and syncategorematic terms, (b) abstract and concrete terms, and (c) absolute and connotative terms. Part I then concludes with a discussion of the five “predicables” from Porphyry’s Isagoge and of each of Aristotle’s categories. While Part I is about terms, Part II is about “propositions,” which are made up of terms. Part II gives a systematic and nuanced theory of truth conditions for the four traditional kinds of assertoric categorical propositions on the “Square of Opposition,” and then goes on to tensed, modal and more complicated categorical propositions, as well as a variety of “hypothetical”  (molecular[13])  propositions. The vehicle for this account of truth conditions is the semantic theory of “supposition,” which will be treated below. If Part I is about terms and Part II about propositions made up of terms, Part III is about arguments, which are in turn made up of propositions made up of terms. It is divided into four subparts. Part III.1 treats syllogisms, and includes a comprehensive theory of modal  syllogistic.[14]  Part III.2 concerns demonstrative syllogisms in particular. Part III.3 is in effect Ockham’s theory of consequence, although it also includes discussions of semantic paradoxes like the Liar (the so called insolubilia) and of the still little-understood disputation form known as “obligation.” Part III.4 is a discussion of fallacies. Thus, while the Summa of Logic is not in any sense a “commentary” on Aristotle’s logical writings, it nevertheless covers all the traditional ground in the traditional order: Porphyry’s Isagoge and Aristotle’s Categories in Part I, On Interpretation in Part II, Prior Analytics in Part III.1, Posterior Analytics in Part III.2, Topics (and much else) in Part III.3, and finally Sophistic Refutations in Part III.4. Part I of the Summa of Logic also introduces a number of semantic notions that play an important role throughout much of Ockham’s philosophy. None of these notions is original with Ockham, although he develops them with great sophistication and employs them with skill. The most basic such notion is “signification.” For the Middle Ages, a term “signifies” what it makes us think of. This notion of signification was unanimously accepted; although there was great dispute over what terms signified, there was agreement over the  criterion.[15]  Ockham, unlike many (but no means all) other medieval logicians, held that terms do not in general signify thought, but can signify anything at all (including things not presently existing). The function of language, therefore, is not so much to communicate thoughts from one mind to another, but to convey information about the  world.[16] In Summa of Logic I.33, Ockham acknowledges four different kinds of signification. In his first sense, a term signifies whatever things it is truly predicable of by means of a present-tensed, assertoric copula. That is, a term t signifies a thing x if and only if ‘This is a t’ is true, pointing to x. In the second sense, t signifies x if and only if ‘This is (or was, or will be, or can be) a t’ is true, pointing to  x.[17]  These first two senses of signification are together called “primary” signification. In the third sense, terms can also be said to signify certain things they are not truly predicable of, no matter the tense or modality of the copula. For instance, the word ‘brave’ not only makes us think of brave people (whether presently existing or not); it also makes us think of the bravery in virtue of which we call them “brave.” Thus, ‘brave’ signifies and is truly predicable of brave people, but also signifies bravery, even though it is not truly predicable of bravery. (Bravery is not brave.) This kind of signification is called “secondary” signification.  To  a first approximation, we can say that a “connotative” term is just a term that has a secondary signification, and that such a connotative term “connotes” exactly what it secondarily signifies; in short, connotation is just secondary  signification.[18]  The fourth sense, finally, is the broadest one: according to it any linguistic unit, including a whole sentence, can be said to signify whatever things it makes us think of in some way or other. A sentence signifies in this sense whatever it is that its terms primarily or secondarily signify. The theory of supposition was the centerpiece of late medieval semantic theory. Supposition is not the same as signification. First of all, terms signify wherever we encounter them, whereas they have supposition only in the context of a proposition. But the differences go beyond that. Whereas signification is a psychological, cognitive relation, the theory of supposition is, at least in part, a theory of reference. For Ockham, there are three main kinds of  supposition[19]: Personal supposition, which was the main focus, was divided into various subkinds, distinguished in terms of a theory of “descent to singulars” and “ascent from singulars.” A quick example will give the flavor: In ‘Every dog is a mammal’, ‘dog’ is said to have “confused and distributive” personal supposition insofar as Although the mechanics of this part of supposition theory are well understood, in Ockham and in other authors, its exact purpose remains an open question. Although at first the theory looks like an account of truth conditions for quantified propositions, it will not work for that purpose. And although the theory was sometimes used as an aid to spotting and analyzing fallacies, this was never done systematically and the theory is in any event ill suited for that  purpose.[21] Ockham was the first philosopher to develop in some detail the notion of “mental language” and to put it to work for him. Aristotle, Boethius and several others had mentioned it before, but Ockham’s innovation was to systematically transpose to the fine-grained analysis of human thought both the grammatical categories of his time, such as those of noun, verb, adverb, singular, plural and so on, and — even more importantly — the central semantical ideas of signification, connotation and supposition introduced in the previous  section.[22]  Written words for him are “subordinated” to spoken words, and spoken words in turn are “subordinated” to mental units called “concepts”, which can be combined into syntactically structured mental propositions, just as spoken and written words can be combined into audible or visible sentences. Whereas the signification of terms in spoken and written language is purely conventional and can be changed by mutual agreement (hence English speakers say ‘dog’ whereas in French it is chien), the signification of mental terms is established by nature, according to Ockham, and cannot be changed at will. Concepts, in other words, are natural signs: my concept of dog naturally signifies dogs. How this “natural signification” is to be accounted for in the final analysis for Ockham is not entirely clear, but it seems to be based both on the fact that simple concepts are normally caused within the mind by their objects (my simple concept of dog originated in me as an effect of my perceptual encounter with dogs), and on the fact that concepts are in some way “naturally similar” to their  objects.[23] This arrangement provides an account of synonymy and equivocation in spoken and written language. Two simple terms (whether from the same or different spoken or written languages) are synonymous if they are ultimately subordinated to the same concept; a single given term of spoken or written language is equivocal if it is ultimately subordinated to more than one concept. This raises an obvious question: Is there synonymy or equivocation in mental language itself? (If there is, it will obviously have to be accounted for in some other way than for spoken/written language.) A great deal of modern secondary literature has been devoted to this question. Trentman [1970] was the first to argue that no, there is no synonymy or equivocation in mental language. On the contrary, mental language for Ockham is a kind of lean, stripped down, “canonical” language with no frills or inessentials, a little like the “ideal languages” postulated by logical atomists in the first part of the twentieth century. Spade [1980] likewise argued in greater detail, on both theoretical and textual grounds, that there is no synonymy or equivocation in mental language. More recently, Panaccio [1990, 2004], Tweedale [1992] (both on largely textual grounds), and Chalmers [1999] (on mainly theoretical grounds) have argued for a different interpretation, which now tends to be more widely accepted. What comes out at this point is that Ockham’s mental language is not to be seen as a logically ideal language and that it does incorporate both some redundancies and some ambiguities. The question is complicated, but it goes to the heart of much of what Ockham is up to. In order to see why, let us return briefly to the theory of  connotation.[24]  Connotation was described  above  in terms of primary and secondary signification. But in Summa of Logic I.10, Ockham himself draws the distinction between absolute and connotative terms by means of the theory of definition. For Ockham, there are two kinds of definitions: real definitions and nominal definitions. A real definition is somehow supposed to reveal the essential metaphysical structure of what it defines; nominal definitions do not do that. As Ockham sets it up, all connotative terms have nominal definitions, never real definitions, and absolute terms (although not all of them) have real definitions, never nominal definitions. (Some absolute terms have no definitions at  all.[25]) As an example of a real definition, consider: ‘Man is a rational animal’ or ‘Man is a substance composed of a body and an intellective soul’. Each of these traditional definitions is correct, and each in its own way expresses the essential metaphysical structure of a human being. But notice: the two definitions do not signify (make us think of) exactly the same things. The first one makes us think of all rational things (in virtue of the first word of the definiens) plus all animals (whether rational or not, in virtue of the second word of the definiens). The second definition makes us think of, among other things, all substances (in virtue of the word ‘substance’ in the definiens), whereas the first one does not. It follows therefore that an absolute term can have several distinct real definitions that don’t always signify exactly the same things. They will primarily signify—be truly predicable of—exactly the same things, since they will primarily signify just what the term they define primarily signifies. But they can also (secondarily) signify other things as  well.[26] Nominal definitions, Ockham says, are different: There is one and only one nominal definition for any given connotative  term.[27]  While a real definition is expected to provide a structural description of certain things (which can be done in various ways, as we just saw), a nominal definition, by contrast, is supposed to unfold in a precise way the signification of the connotative term it serves to define, and this can only be done, Ockham thinks, by explicitly mentioning, in the right order and with the right connections, which kind of things are primarily signified by this term and which are secondarily signified. The nominal definition of the connotative term “brave”, to take a simple example, is “a living being endowed with bravery”; this reveals that “brave” primarily signifies certain living beings (referred to by the first part of the definition) and that it secondarily signifies — or connotes — singular qualities of bravery (referred to by the last part of the  definition).[28]  Any non-equivalent nominal definition is bound to indicate a different signification and would, consequently, be unsuitable if the original one was correct. Now, several commentators, following Trentman and Spade, concluded on this basis that there are no simple connotative terms in Ockham’s mental language. They reasoned as follows: a connotative term is synonymous with its nominal definition, but there is no synonymy in mental language according to Ockham; mental language, therefore, cannot contain both a simple connotative term and its complex nominal definition; since it must certainly have the resources for formulating adequate definitions, what must be dispensed with is the defined simple term; and since all connotative terms are supposed to have a nominal definition, it follows that mental language contains only absolute terms (along with syncategorematic ones, of course). It even came to be supposed in this line of interpretation, that the very central point of Ockham’s nominalist program was to show that if anything can be truly said about the world, it can be said using only absolute and syncategorematic terms, and that this is precisely what happens in mental language. The consequences were far-reaching. Not only did this interpretation claim to provide an overall understanding of what Ockham was up to, but it also inevitably led to conclude that his whole nominalist program was bound to failure. All relational terms, indeed, are taken to be connotative terms in Ockham’s semantics. The program, consequently, was thought to require the semantical reduction of all relational terms to combinations of non-relational ones, which seems hardly possible. Thus, the question whether there are simple connotative terms or not in Ockham’s mental language is crucial to our understanding of the success of his overall ontological project. Since spoken and written languages are semantically derivative on mental language, it is vital that we get the semantics of mental language to work out right for Ockham, or else the systematic coherence of much of what he has to say will be in jeopardy. In view of recent scholarship, though, it appears highly doubtful that Ockham’s purpose really was to use nominal definitions to eliminate all simple connotative terms from mental language. For one thing, as Spade had remarked himself, Ockham never systematically engages in explicit attempts at such semantical reductions, which would be quite odd if this was the central component of his nominalism. Furthermore it was shown that Ockham did in fact hold that there are simple connotative terms in mental language. He says it explicitly and repeatedly, and in a variety of texts from his earlier to his later philosophical and theological  writings.[29]  The secondary literature, consequently, has now gradually converged on the view that, for Ockham, there is no synonymy among simple terms in mental language, but that there can be some redundancy between simple terms and complex expressions, or between various complex expressions. If so, nothing prevents a simple connotative concept to coexist in mental language with its nominal definition. Ockham indeed explicitly denies that a complex definition is in general wholly synonymous with the corresponding defined  term.[30]  His point, presumably, is that the definition usually signifies more things than the defined term. Take “brave” again. Its definition, remember, is “a living being endowed with bravery”. Now, the first part of this complex expression makes us think of all living beings, whereas the simple term “brave” has only the brave ones as its primary significates and does not signify in any way the non-brave living beings. This shows in effect that simple connotative terms are not — at least not always — shorthand abbreviations for their nominal definitions in Ockham’s view. And it must be conjectured that some simple connotative concepts can be directly acquired on the basis of perceptual experiences, just as absolute ones are supposed to be (think of a relational concept like “taller than” or a qualitative one like “white”). Ockham’s nominal definitions, then, should not be seen as reductionist devices for eliminating certain terms, but as a privileged means for making conspicuous what the (primary and secondary) significates of the defined terms are. The main point here is that such definitions, when correctly formulated, explicitly reveal the ontological commitments associated with the normal use of the defined terms. The definition of “brave” as “a living being endowed with bravery”, for example, shows that the correct use of the term “brave” commits us only to the existence of singular living beings and singular braveries. Ockham’s nominalism does not require the elimination of simple connotative concepts after all; its main relevant thesis, on the contrary, is that their use is ontologically harmless since they do not signify (either primarily or secondarily) anything but individual things, as their nominal definitions are supposed to make it clear.