 As suggested in the supplementary document on   Kant,  the decompositional conception of analysis found its classic  statement in the work of Kant at the end of the eighteenth century.  But Kant was only expressing a conception widespread at the time. The conception can be found in a very blatant form, for example, in the  writings of Moses Mendelssohn, for whom, unlike Kant, it was  applicable even in the case of geometry   [Quotation].  Typified in Kant's and Mendelssohn's view of concepts, it was also reflected in scientific practice. Indeed, its popularity was fostered by the chemical revolution inaugurated by Lavoisier in the  late eighteenth century, the comparison between philosophical  analysis and chemical analysis being frequently drawn. As Lichtenberg put it, “Whichever way you look at it, philosophy is always  analytical chemistry”   [Quotation]. This decompositional conception of analysis set the methodological  agenda for philosophical approaches and debates in the (late) modern  period (nineteenth and twentieth centuries). Responses and  developments, very broadly, can be divided into two. On the one hand, an essentially decompositional conception of analysis was accepted,  but a critical attitude was adopted towards it. If analysis simply  involved breaking something down, then it appeared destructive and  life-diminishing, and the critique of analysis that this view  engendered was a common theme in idealism and romanticism in all its  main varieties—from German, British and French to North  American. One finds it reflected, for example, in remarks about the  negating and soul-destroying power of analytical thinking by Schiller   [Quotation],  Hegel   [Quotation]  and de Chardin   [Quotation],  in Bradley's doctrine that analysis is falsification   [Quotation],  and in the emphasis placed by Bergson on ‘intuition’   [Quotation]. On the other hand, analysis was seen more positively, but the Kantian conception underwent a certain degree of modification and  development. In the nineteenth century, this was exemplified, in  particular, by Bolzano and the neo-Kantians. Bolzano's most  important innovation was the method of variation, which involves  considering what happens to the truth-value of a sentence when a  constituent term is substituted by another. This formed the basis for his reconstruction of the analytic/synthetic distinction,  Kant's account of which he found defective. The neo-Kantians  emphasized the role of structure in conceptualized experience and had a greater appreciation of forms of analysis in mathematics and  science. In many ways, their work attempts to do justice to  philosophical and scientific practice while recognizing the central  idealist claim that analysis is a kind of abstraction that inevitably involves falsification or distortion. On the neo-Kantian view, the  complexity of experience is a complexity of form and content rather  than of separable constituents, requiring analysis into  ‘moments’ or ‘aspects’ rather than  ‘elements’ or ‘parts’. In the 1910s, the idea was articulated with great subtlety by Ernst Cassirer   [Quotation],  and became familiar in Gestalt psychology. In the twentieth century, both analytic philosophy and phenomenology  can be seen as developing far more sophisticated conceptions of  analysis, which draw on but go beyond mere decompositional analysis.  The following   Section  offers an account of analysis in analytic philosophy, illustrating  the range and richness of the conceptions and practices that arose.  But it is important to see these in the wider context of  twentieth-century methodological practices and debates, for it is not just in ‘analytic’ philosophy—despite its  name—that analytic methods are accorded a central role.  Phenomenology, in particular, contains its own distinctive set of  analytic methods, with similarities and differences to those of  analytic philosophy. Phenomenological analysis has frequently been  compared to conceptual clarification in the ordinary language  tradition, for example, and the method of ‘phenomenological  reduction’ that Husserl invented in 1905 offers a striking  parallel to the reductive project opened up by Russell's theory of descriptions, which also made its appearance in 1905. Just like Frege and Russell, Husserl's initial concern was with the foundations of mathematics, and in this shared concern we can see the continued influence of the regressive conception of analysis.  According to Husserl, the aim of ‘eidetic reduction’, as  he called it, was to isolate the ‘essences’ that underlie our various forms of thinking, and to apprehend them by  ‘essential intuition’  (‘Wesenserschauung’). The terminology may be  different, but this resembles Russell's early project to  identify the ‘indefinables’ of philosophical logic, as he described it, and to apprehend them by ‘acquaintance’  (cf. POM, xx). Furthermore, in Husserl's later  discussion of ‘explication’ (cf. EJ,  §§ 22-4   [Quotations]),  we find appreciation of the ‘transformative’ dimension of analysis, which can be fruitfully compared with Carnap's  account of explication (see the supplementary section on   Carnap and Logical Positivism).  Carnap himself describes Husserl's idea here as one of  “the synthesis of identification between a confused,  nonarticulated sense and a subsequently intended distinct,  articulated sense” (1950, 3   [Quotation]). Phenomenology is not the only source of analytic methodologies  outside those of the analytic tradition. Mention might be made here,  too, of R. G. Collingwood, working within the tradition of British  idealism, which was still a powerful force prior to the Second World  War. In his Essay on Philosophical Method (1933), for  example, he criticizes Moorean philosophy, and develops his own  response to what is essentially the paradox of analysis (concerning  how an analysis can be both correct and informative), which he  recognizes as having its root in Meno's paradox. In his  Essay on Metaphysics (1940), he puts forward his own  conception of metaphysical analysis, in direct response to what he  perceived as the mistaken repudiation of metaphysics by the logical  positivists. Metaphysical analysis is characterized here as the  detection of ‘absolute presuppositions’, which are taken  as underlying and shaping the various conceptual practices that can  be identified in the history of philosophy and science. Even among  those explicitly critical of central strands in analytic philosophy,  then, analysis in one form or another can still be seen as alive and  well. For further reading, see the