 If anything characterizes ‘analytic’ philosophy, then it  is presumably the emphasis placed on analysis. But as the foregoing  sections have shown, there is a wide range of conceptions of  analysis, so such a characterization says nothing that would  distinguish analytic philosophy from much of what has either preceded or developed alongside it. Given that the decompositional conception  is usually offered as the main conception today, it might be thought  that it is this that characterizes analytic philosophy. But this  conception was prevalent in the early modern period, shared by both  the British Empiricists and Leibniz, for example. Given that Kant  denied the importance of decompositional analysis, however, it might  be suggested that what characterizes analytic philosophy is the  value it places on such analysis. This might be true of  Moore's early work, and of one strand within analytic  philosophy; but it is not generally true. What characterizes analytic philosophy as it was founded by Frege and Russell is the role played  by logical analysis, which depended on the development of  modern logic. Although other and subsequent forms of analysis, such  as linguistic analysis, were less wedded to systems of formal logic,  the central insight motivating logical analysis remained. Pappus's account of method in ancient Greek geometry suggests  that the regressive conception of analysis was dominant at the  time—however much other conceptions may also have been  implicitly involved (see the supplementary section on   Ancient Greek Geometry).  In the early modern period, the decompositional conception became  widespread (see   Section 4).  What characterizes analytic philosophy—or at least that central strand that originates in the work of Frege and Russell—is the  recognition of what was called earlier the transformative or interpretive dimension of analysis (see   Section 1.1).  Any analysis presupposes a particular framework of interpretation,  and work is done in interpreting what we are seeking to  analyze as part of the process of regression and decomposition. This  may involve transforming it in some way, in order for the  resources of a given theory or conceptual framework to be brought to  bear. Euclidean geometry provides a good illustration of this. But it is even more obvious in the case of analytic geometry, where the  geometrical problem is first ‘translated’ into the  language of algebra and arithmetic in order to solve it more easily  (see the supplementary section on   Descartes and Analytic Geometry).  What Descartes and Fermat did for analytic geometry, Frege and  Russell did for analytic philosophy. Analytic philosophy is  ‘analytic’ much more in the sense that analytic geometry  is ‘analytic’ than in the crude decompositional sense  that Kant understood it. The interpretive dimension of modern philosophical analysis can also  be seen as anticipated in medieval scholasticism (see the  supplementary section on   Medieval Philosophy),  and it is remarkable just how much of modern concerns with  propositions, meaning, reference, and so on, can be found in the  medieval literature. Interpretive analysis is also illustrated in the nineteenth century by Bentham's conception of  paraphrasis, which he characterized as “that sort of  exposition which may be afforded by transmuting into a proposition,  having for its subject some real entity, a proposition which has not  for its subject any other than a fictitious entity”   [Full Quotation].  He applied the idea in ‘analyzing away’ talk of  ‘obligations’, and the anticipation that we can see here  of Russell's theory of descriptions has been noted by, among  others, Wisdom (1931) and Quine in ‘Five Milestones of  Empiricism’   [Quotation]. What was crucial in the emergence of twentieth-century analytic  philosophy, however, was the development of quantificational theory,  which provided a far more powerful interpretive system than anything  that had hitherto been available. In the case of Frege and Russell,  the system into which statements were ‘translated’ was  predicate logic, and the divergence that was thereby opened up  between grammatical and logical form meant that the process of  translation itself became an issue of philosophical concern. This  induced greater self-consciousness about our use of language and its  potential to mislead us, and inevitably raised semantic,  epistemological and metaphysical questions about the relationships  between language, logic, thought and reality which have been at the  core of analytic philosophy ever since. Both Frege and Russell (after the latter's initial flirtation  with idealism) were concerned to show, against Kant, that arithmetic  is a system of analytic and not synthetic truths. In the  Grundlagen, Frege had offered a revised conception of  analyticity, which arguably endorses and generalizes Kant's  logical as opposed to phenomenological criterion, i.e., (ANL) rather than (ANO) (see the supplementary section on   Kant): The question of whether arithmetical truths are analytic then comes  down to the question of whether they can be derived purely logically. (Here we already have ‘transformation’, at the  theoretical level—involving a reinterpretation of the concept  of analyticity.) To demonstrate this, Frege realized that he needed  to develop logical theory in order to formalize mathematical  statements, which typically involve multiple generality (e.g.,  ‘Every natural number has a successor’, i.e. ‘For  every natural number x there is another natural number  y that is the successor of x’). This  development, by extending the use of function-argument analysis in  mathematics to logic and providing a notation for quantification, was essentially the achievement of his first book, the  Begriffsschrift (1879), where he not only created the first  system of predicate logic but also, using it, succeeded in giving a  logical analysis of mathematical induction (see Frege FR,  47-78). In his second book, Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik (1884),  Frege went on to provide a logical analysis of number statements. His central idea was that a number statement contains an assertion about  a concept. A statement such as ‘Jupiter has four moons’  is to be understood not as predicating of Jupiter the property of  having four moons, but as predicating of the concept moon of  Jupiter the second-level property has four instances,  which can be logically defined. The significance of this construal  can be brought out by considering negative existential statements  (which are equivalent to number statements involving the number 0).  Take the following negative existential statement: If we attempt to analyze this decompositionally, taking its  grammatical form to mirror its logical form, then we find ourselves  asking what these unicorns are that have the property of  non-existence. We may then be forced to posit the  subsistence—as opposed to existence—of  unicorns, just as Meinong and the early Russell did, in order for  there to be something that is the subject of our statement. On the  Fregean account, however, to deny that something exists is to say  that the relevant concept has no instances: there is no need to posit any mysterious object. The Fregean analysis of (0a) consists in rephrasing it into (0b), which can then be  readily formalized in the new logic as (0c): (0c) ~(∃x) Fx. Similarly, to say that God exists is to say that the concept  God is (uniquely) instantiated, i.e., to deny that the  concept has 0 instances (or 2 or more instances). On this view,  existence is no longer seen as a (first-level) predicate, but  instead, existential statements are analyzed in terms of the  (second-level) predicate is instantiated, represented by  means of the existential quantifier. As Frege notes, this offers a  neat diagnosis of what is wrong with the ontological argument, at  least in its traditional form (GL, §53). All the  problems that arise if we try to apply decompositional analysis (at  least straight off) simply drop away, although an account is still  needed, of course, of concepts and quantifiers. The possibilities that this strategy of ‘translating’  into a logical language opens up are enormous: we are no longer  forced to treat the surface grammatical form of a statement as a  guide to its ‘real’ form, and are provided with a means  of representing that form. This is the value of logical analysis: it  allows us to ‘analyze away’ problematic linguistic  expressions and explain what it is ‘really’ going on.  This strategy was employed, most famously, in Russell's theory  of descriptions, which was a major motivation behind the ideas of  Wittgenstein's Tractatus (see the supplementary  sections on   Russell  and   Wittgenstein).  Although subsequent philosophers were to question the assumption that there could ever be a definitive logical analysis of a given  statement, the idea that ordinary language may be systematically  misleading has remained. To illustrate this, consider the following examples from Ryle's classic 1932 paper, ‘Systematically Misleading  Expressions’: (Ta) Jones hates the thought of going to hospital. In each case, we might be tempted to make unnecessary reifications,  taking ‘unpunctuality’ and ‘the thought of going to hospital’ as referring to objects. It is because of this that  Ryle describes such expressions as ‘systematically  misleading’. (Ua) and (Ta) must therefore be rephrased: (Tb) Jones feels distressed when he thinks of what he will undergo if he goes to hospital. In these formulations, there is no overt talk at all of  ‘unpunctuality’ or ‘thoughts’, and hence  nothing to tempt us to posit the existence of any corresponding  entities. The problems that otherwise arise have thus been  ‘analyzed away’. At the time that Ryle wrote ‘Systematically Misleading  Expressions’, he, too, assumed that every statement had an  underlying logical form that was to be exhibited in its  ‘correct’ formulation   [Quotations].  But when he gave up this assumption (for reasons indicated in the  supplementary section on   The Cambridge School of Analysis),  he did not give up the motivating idea of logical analysis—to  show what is wrong with misleading expressions. In The Concept of Mind (1949), for example, he sought to explain what he called  the ‘category-mistake’ involved in talk of the mind as a  kind of ‘Ghost in the Machine’. His aim, he wrote, was to “rectify the logical geography of the knowledge which we  already possess” (1949, 9), an idea that was to lead to the  articulation of connective rather than reductive  conceptions of analysis, the emphasis being placed on elucidating the relationships between concepts without assuming that there is a  privileged set of intrinsically basic concepts (see the supplementary section on   Oxford Linguistic Philosophy). What these various forms of logical analysis suggest, then, is that  what characterizes analysis in analytic philosophy is something far  richer than the mere ‘decomposition’ of a concept into  its ‘constituents’. But this is not to say that the  decompositional conception of analysis plays no role at all. It can  be found in the early work of Moore, for example (see the  supplementary section on   Moore).  It might also be seen as reflected in the approach to the analysis of concepts that seeks to specify the necessary and sufficient  conditions for their correct employment. Conceptual analysis in this  sense goes back to the Socrates of Plato's early dialogues (see the supplementary section on   Plato).  But it arguably reached its heyday in the 1950s and 1960s. As  mentioned in   Section 2  above, the definition of ‘knowledge’ as ‘justified  true belief’ is perhaps the most famous example; and this  definition was criticised in Gettier's classic paper of 1963.  (For details of this, see the entry in this Encyclopedia on   The Analysis of Knowledge.)  The specification of necessary and sufficient conditions may no  longer be seen as the primary aim of conceptual analysis, especially  in the case of philosophical concepts such as  ‘knowledge’, which are fiercely contested; but  consideration of such conditions remains a useful tool in the  analytic philosopher's toolbag. For a more detailed account of the these and related conceptions of  analysis, see the supplementary document on For further reading, see the