 This section provides a preliminary description of analysis—or  the range of different conceptions of analysis—and a guide to  this article as a whole. If asked what ‘analysis’ means, most people today  immediately think of breaking something down into its components; and this is how analysis tends to be officially characterized. In the  Concise Oxford Dictionary, for example,  ‘analysis’ is defined as the “resolution into  simpler elements by analysing (opp. synthesis)”, the  only other uses mentioned being the mathematical and the  psychological   [Quotation].  And in the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy,  ‘analysis’ is defined as “the process of breaking a concept down into more simple parts, so that its logical structure is displayed”   [Quotation].  The restriction to concepts and the reference to displaying  ‘logical structure’ are important qualifications, but the core conception remains that of breaking something down. This conception may be called the decompositional conception of analysis (see   Section 4).  But it is not the only conception, and indeed is arguably neither the dominant conception in the pre-modern period nor the conception that  is characteristic of at least one major strand in  ‘analytic’ philosophy. In ancient Greek thought,  ‘analysis’ referred primarily to the process of working  back to first principles by means of which something could then be  demonstrated. This conception may be called the regressive  conception of analysis (see   Section 2).  In the work of Frege and Russell, on the other hand, before the  process of decomposition could take place, the statements to be  analyzed had first to be translated into their ‘correct’  logical form (see   Section 6).  This suggests that analysis also involves a transformative  or interpretive dimension. This too, however, has its roots  in earlier thought (see especially the supplementary sections on   Ancient Greek Geometry  and   Medieval Philosophy). These three conceptions should not be seen as competing. In actual  practices of analysis, which are invariably richer than the accounts  that are offered of them, all three conceptions are typically  reflected, though to differing degrees and in differing forms. To  analyze something, we may first have to interpret it in some way,  translating an initial statement, say, into the privileged language  of logic, mathematics or science, before articulating the relevant  elements and structures, and all in the service of identifying  fundamental principles by means of which to explain it. The  complexities that this schematic description suggests can only be  appreciated by considering particular types of analysis. Understanding conceptions of analysis is not simply a matter of  attending to the use of the word ‘analysis’ and its  cognates—or obvious equivalents in languages other than  English, such as ‘analusis’ in Greek or  ‘Analyse’ in German. Socratic definition is  arguably a form of conceptual analysis, yet the term  ‘analusis’ does not occur anywhere in  Plato's dialogues (see   Section 2  below). Nor, indeed, do we find it in Euclid's  Elements, which is the classic text for understanding  ancient Greek geometry: Euclid presupposed what came to be known as  the method of analysis in presenting his proofs  ‘synthetically’. In Latin,  ‘resolutio’ was used to render the Greek word  ‘analusis’, and although  ‘resolution’ has a different range of meanings, it is  often used synonymously with ‘analysis’ (see the  supplementary section on   Renaissance Philosophy).  In Aristotelian syllogistic theory, and especially from the time of  Descartes, forms of analysis have also involved  ‘reduction’; and in early analytic philosophy it was  ‘reduction’ that was seen as the goal of philosophical  analysis (see especially the supplementary section on   The Cambridge School of Analysis). Further details of characterizations of analysis that have been  offered in the history of philosophy, including all the classic  passages and remarks (to which occurrences of   ‘[Quotation]’  throughout this entry refer), can be found in the supplementary  document on A list of key reference works, monographs and collections can be  found in the This entry comprises three sets of documents: The present document provides an overview, with introductions to the  various conceptions of analysis in the history of philosophy. It also contains links to the supplementary documents, the documents in the  bibliography, and other internet resources. The supplementary  documents expand on certain topics under each of the six main  sections. The annotated bibliography contains a list of key readings  on each topic, and is also divided according to the sections of this  entry.