 The word ‘analysis’ derives from the ancient Greek term  ‘analusis’. The prefix  ‘ana’ means ‘up’, and  ‘lusis’ means ‘loosing’,  ‘release’ or ‘separation’, so that  ‘analusis’ means ‘loosening up’ or  ‘dissolution’. The term was readily extended to the  solving or dissolving of a problem, and it was in this sense that it  was employed in ancient Greek geometry and philosophy. The method of  analysis that was developed in ancient Greek geometry had an  influence on both Plato and Aristotle. Also important, however, was  the influence of Socrates's concern with definition, in which  the roots of modern conceptual analysis can be found. What we have in ancient Greek thought, then, is a complex web of methodologies, of  which the most important are Socratic definition, which Plato  elaborated into his method of division, his related method of  hypothesis, which drew on geometrical analysis, and the method(s)  that Aristotle developed in his Analytics. Far from a  consensus having established itself over the last two millennia, the  relationships between these methodologies are the subject of  increasing debate today. At the heart of all of them, too, lie the  philosophical problems raised by Meno's paradox, which  anticipates what we now know as the paradox of analysis, concerning  how an analysis can be both correct and informative (see the  supplementary section on   Moore),  and Plato's attempt to solve it through the theory of  recollection, which has spawned a vast literature on its own. ‘Analysis’ was first used in a methodological sense in  ancient Greek geometry, and the model that Euclidean geometry  provided has been an inspiration ever since. Although Euclid's  Elements dates from around 300 BC, and hence after both  Plato and Aristotle, it is clear that it draws on the work of many  previous geometers, most notably, Theaetetus and Eudoxus, who worked  closely with Plato and Aristotle. Plato is even credited by Diogenes  Laertius (LEP, I, 299) with inventing the method of  analysis, but whatever the truth of this may be, the influence of  geometry starts to show in his middle dialogues, and he certainly  encouraged work on geometry in his Academy. The classic source for our understanding of ancient Greek geometrical analysis is a passage in Pappus's Mathematical  Collection, which was composed around 300 AD, and hence drew on  a further six centuries of work in geometry from the time of  Euclid's Elements: In synthesis, on the other hand, we suppose that which was reached  last in analysis to be already done, and arranging in their natural  order as consequents (epomena) the former antecedents and  linking them one with another, we in the end arrive at the  construction of the thing sought. And this we call synthesis.   [Full Quotation] Analysis is clearly being understood here in the regressive  sense—as involving the working back from ‘what is  sought’, taken as assumed, to something more fundamental by  means of which it can then be established, through its converse,  synthesis. For example, to demonstrate Pythagoras's  theorem—that the square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled  triangle is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two  sides—we may assume as ‘given’ a right-angled triangle with the three squares drawn on its sides. In investigating the properties of  this complex figure we may draw further (auxiliary) lines between  particular points and find that there are a number of congruent  triangles, from which we can begin to work out the relationship  between the relevant areas. Pythagoras's theorem thus depends  on theorems about congruent triangles, and once these—and  other—theorems have been identified (and themselves proved),  Pythagoras's theorem can be proved. (The theorem is  demonstrated in Proposition 47 of Book I of Euclid's  Elements.) The basic idea here provides the core of the conception of analysis  that one can find reflected, in its different ways, in the work of  Plato and Aristotle (see the supplementary sections on   Plato  and   Aristotle).  Although detailed examination of actual practices of analysis reveals more than just regression to first causes, principles or theorems,  but decomposition and transformation as well (see  especially the supplementary section on   Ancient Greek Geometry),  the regressive conception dominated views of analysis until well into the early modern period. Ancient Greek geometry was not the only source of later conceptions  of analysis, however. Plato may not have used the term  ‘analysis’ himself, but concern with definition was  central to his dialogues, and definitions have often been seen as  what ‘conceptual analysis’ should yield. The definition  of ‘knowledge’ as ‘justified true belief’ (or ‘true belief with an account’, in more Platonic terms) is perhaps the classic example. Plato's concern may have been with real rather than nominal definitions, with ‘essences’  rather than mental or linguistic contents (see the supplementary  section on   Plato),  but conceptual analysis, too, has frequently been given a  ‘realist’ construal. Certainly, the roots of conceptual  analysis can be traced back to Plato's search for definitions,  as we shall see in   Section 4  below. Further discussion can be found in the supplementary document on Further reading can be found in the