 If propositions are the “things” that really have logical form, and sentences of English are not themselves propositions, then sentences of English “have” logical forms only by association with propositions. But if the meaning of a sentence is some proposition—or perhaps a function from contexts to propositions—then one might say that the logical form “of” a sentence is its semantic structure (i.e., the structure of that sentence's meaning). Alternatively, one might suspect that in the end, talk of propositions is just convenient shorthand for talking about the semantic properties of sentences: perhaps sentences of a Begriffsschrift, or sentences of mentalese, or sentences of natural languages (abstracting away from their logically/semantically irrelevant properties). In any case, the notion of logical form has played a significant role in recent work on theories of meaning for natural languages. So an introductory discussion of logical form would not be complete without some hint of why such work is relevant, especially since attending to details of natural languages (as opposed to languages invented to study the foundations of arithmetic) led to renewed discussion of how to represent propositions that involve relations. Prima facie, ‘Every old patient respects some doctor’ and ‘Some young politician likes every liar’ exhibit common modes of linguistic combination. So a natural hypothesis is that the meaning of each sentence is fixed by these modes of combination, given the relevant word meanings. It may be hard to see how this hypothesis could be true if there are widespread mismatches between logical and grammatical form. But it is also hard to see how the hypothesis could be false. Children, who have finite cognitive resources, typically acquire the capacity to understand the endlessly many expressions of the languages spoken around them. A great deal of recent work has focussed on these issues, concering the connections between logical form and the senses in which natural languages are semantically compositional. It was implicit in Frege that each of the endlessly many sentences of an ideal language would have a compositionally determined truth-condition. Frege did not actually specify an algorithm that would associate each sentence of his Begriffsschrift with its truth-condition. But Tarski (1933) showed how to do this for the first-order predicate calculus, focussing on interesting cases of multiple quantification like ‘∀x[Number(x) → ∃y[SuccessorOf(y, x) & ∀z[SuccessorOf(z, x) → (z = y)]]]’. This made it possible to capture, with precision, the idea that an inference is valid in the predicate calculus iff: every interpretation that makes the premises true also makes the conclusion true, holding fixed the interpretations of logical elements like ‘if’ and ‘every’. Davidson (1967a) conjectured that one could do for English what Tarski did for the predicate calculus; and Montague, similarly inspired by Tarski, showed how one could start dealing with predicates that have quantificational constituents. Still, many apparent objections to the conjecture remained. As noted at the end of section four, sentences like ‘Pat thinks that Hesperus is Phosphorus’ present difficulties; though Davidson (1968) offered an influential suggestion. Davidson's (1967b) proposal concerning examples like (37–40) also proved enormously fruitful. If (37) is true, so are (38–40); and if (38) or (39) is true, so is (40). The inferences seem impeccable. But the function-argument structures are not obvious. If we represent ‘kissed quickly at midnight’ as an unstructured predicate that takes two arguments, like ‘kissed’ or ‘kicked’, we will represent the inference from (37) to (40) as having the form: K*(x, y); so K(x, y). But this form is exemplified by the bad inference ‘Juliet kicked Romeo; so Juliet kissed Romeo’. Put another way, if ‘kissed quickly at midnight’ is a logically unstructured binary predicate, then the following conditional is a nonlogical assumption: if Juliet kissed Romeo in a certain manner at a certain time, then Juliet kissed Romeo. But this conditional seems like a tautology, not an assumption that introduces any epistemic risk. Davidson concluded that the surface appearances of sentences like (37–40) mask relevant semantic structure. In particular, he proposed that such sentences are understood in terms of quantification over events. According to Davdison, who echoed Ramsey (1927), the meaning of (40) is reflected in the paraphrase ‘There was a kissing of Romeo by Juliet’. One can formalize this proposal in various ways: ∃e[KissingOf(e, Romeo) & KissingBy(e, Juliet)]; or ∃e[Kiss(e, Juliet, Romeo)], with the verb ‘kiss’ indicating a function that takes three arguments; or as in (40a), with Juliet and Romeo explicitly represented as players of certain roles in an event. But given any such representation, adverbs like ‘quickly’ and ‘at midnight’ can be analyzed as additional predicates of events, as shown in (37a-39a). If this is correct, then the inference from (37) to (40) is an instance of the following valid form: ∃e[...e... & Q(e) & A(e))]; hence, ∃e[...e...]. The other impeccable inferences involving (37–40) can likewise be viewed as instances of conjunction reduction. If the grammatical form of (40) is simply ‘{Juliet [kissed Romeo]}’, then the mapping from grammatical to logical form is not transparent; and natural language is misleading, in that no word corresponds to the event quantifier. But this does not posit a significant structural mismatch between grammatical and logical form. On the contrary, each word in (40) corresponds to a conjunct in (40a). This suggests a strategy for thinking about how the meaning of a sentence like (40) might be composed from the meanings of the constituent words. A growing body of literature, in philosophy and linguistics, suggests that Davidson's proposal captures an important feature of natural language semantics, and that “event analyses” provide a useful framework for future discussions of logical form. In one sense, it is an ancient idea that action reports like (40) represent individuals as participating in events; see Gillon's (2007) discussion of Panini's grammar of Sanskrit. But if (40) can be glossed as ‘Juliet did some kissing, and Romeo was thereby kissed’, perhaps the ancient idea can be deployed in developing Leibniz' suggestion that relational sentences like (40) somehow contain simpler active-voice and passive-voice sentences; cp. Kratzer (1996). And perhaps appeals to quantifier raising can help in defending the idea that ‘Juliet kissed some/the/every boy’ is, after all, a sentence that exhibits Subject-copula-Predicate form: ‘[some/the/every boy]i is P’, with ‘P’ as a complex predicate akin to ‘[some event]e was both a kissing done by Juliet and one in which hei was kissed’. With this in mind, let's return to the idea that each complex expression of natural language has semantic properties that are determined by (i) the semantic properties of its constituents, and (ii) the ways in which these constituents are grammatically arranged. If this is correct, then following Davidson, one might say that the logical forms of expressions (of some natural language) just are the structures that determine the corresponding meanings given the relevant word meanings; see Lepore and Ludwig (2002). In which case, the phenomenon of valid inference may be largely a by-product of semantic compositionality. If principles governing the meanings of (37–40) have the consequence that (40) is true iff an existential claim like (40a) is true, perhaps this is illustrative of the general case. Given a sentence of some natural language NL, the task of specifying its logical form may be inseparable from the task of providing a compositional specification of what the sentences of NL mean.