 Even given restricted quantifiers (and acceptance of second-order logical forms), the subject/predicate structure of ‘Juliet / likes every doctor’ diverges from the corresponding formula below. We can rewrite ‘Likes(Juliet, y)’ as ‘[Likes(y)](Juliet)’, to reflect the fact that ‘likes’ combines with a direct object to form a phrase, which in turn combines with a subject. But this does not affect the main point; ‘every’ seems to be a grammatical constituent of the verb phrase ‘likes every doctor’, and yet the main quantifier of the expressed proposition. In natural language, ‘likes’ and ‘every doctor’ form a phrase. But with respect to logical form, ‘likes’ evidently combines with ‘Juliet’ and a variable to form a complex predicate that is in turn an external argument of the higher-order predicate ‘every’. Similar remarks apply to ‘Some boy likes every doctor’ and ‘[∃x:Boy(x)][∀y:Doctor(y)]{Likes(x, y)]’. So it seems that mismatches remain in the very places that troubled medieval logicians—viz., quantificational direct objects and other examples of complex predicates with quantificational constituents. Montague (1970, 1974) showed that these mismatches do not preclude systematic connections of natural language sentences with the corresponding propositional structures. Abstracting from the technical details, one can specify an algorithm that pairs each natural language sentence that contains one or more quantificational expressions like ‘every doctor’ with one or more Fregean logical forms. This was a significant advance. Together with subsequent developments, Montague's work showed that Frege's logic was compatible with the idea that quantificational constructions in natural language have a systematic semantics. Indeed, one can use Frege's formal apparatus to study such constructions. Montague himself maintained that the syntax of natural language was misleading for purposes of (what he took to be) real semantics. On this view, the study of valid inference still suggests that natural language grammar disguises the structure of human thought. But in thinking about the relation of logic to grammar, one should not assume a naive conception of the latter. For example, the grammatical form of a sentence need not be determined by the linear order of its words. Using brackets to disambiguate, we can distinguish the sentence ‘Mary [saw [the [boy [with binoculars]]]]’—whose direct object is ‘the boy with binoculars’—from the homophonous sentence ‘Mary [[saw [the boy]] [with binoculars]]’, in which ‘saw the boy’ is modified by an adverbial phrase. The first implies that the boy had binoculars, while the second implies that Mary used binoculars to see the boy. This distinction may not be audibly marked.  Nonetheless, there is a difference between modifying a noun (like ‘boy’) with a prepositional phrase and modifying a verb phrase (‘saw the boy’). More generally, grammatical structure need not be obvious. Just as it may take work to discover the kind(s) of structure that propositions exhibit, so it may take work to discover the kind(s) of structure that sentences exhibit. And many studies of natural language suggest a rich conception of grammatical form that diverges from traditional views; see especially Chomsky (1957, 1965, 1981, 1986, 1995). So we need to ask how logical forms are related to actual grammatical forms, which linguists try to discover, since these may differ importantly from any hypothesized grammatical forms that may be suggested by casual reflection on spoken language.  Appearances may be misleading with respect to both grammatical and logical form, leaving room for the possibility that these notions of structure are not so different after all. A leading idea of modern linguistics is that at least some grammatical structures are transformations of others. Put another way, linguistic expressions often appear to be displaced from the positions canonically associated with certain grammatical relations that the expressions exhibit. For example, the word ‘who’ in (17) is apparently associated with the internal (direct object) argument position of the verb ‘saw’. Correspondingly, (17) can be glossed as ‘Mary wondered which person is such that John saw that person’. This invites the hypothesis that (17) reflects a transformation of the “Deep Structure” (17D) into the “Surface Structure” (17S), with indices indicating a grammatical relation between the indexed positions. In (17D), the embedded clause has the same form as ‘John saw Bill’. But in (17S), ‘who’ has been displaced from the indexed argument position. Similar remarks apply to the question ‘Who did John see’ and other question-words like ‘why’, ‘what’, ‘when’, and ‘how’. One might also explain the synonymy of (18) and (19) by positing a common deep structure, (18D). If every English sentence needs a grammatical subject, (18D) must be modified: either by displacing ‘John’, as in (18S); or by inserting a pleonastic subject, as in (19). Note that in (19), ‘It’ does not indicate an argument; compare ‘There’ in ‘There is something in the garden’. Appeal to displacement also lets one distinguish the superficially parallel sentences (20) and (21). If (20) is true, John is easily pleased. In which case, it is easy (for someone) to please John; where ‘it’ is pleonastic. But if (21) is true, John is eager that he please someone or other. This asymmetry is effaced by representations like ‘Easy-to-please(John)’ and ‘Eager-to-please(John)’. The contrast is made manifest, however, with (20S) and (21S); where ‘e’ indicates an unpronounced argument position. It may be that in (21S), which does not mean that it is eager for John to please someone, ‘John’ is grammatically linked but not actually displaced from the coindexed position. But whatever the details, the “surface subject” of a sentence can be the object of a verb embedded within the main predicate, as in (20S). Of course, such hypotheses about grammatical structure require defense. But Chomsky and others have long argued that such hypotheses are needed to account for various facts concerning human linguistic capacities; see, e.g., Berwick et.al. (2014). As an illustration of the kind of data that is relevant, note that (22–24) are perfectly fine expressions of English, while (25) is not. This suggests that the auxiliary verb ‘was’ can be displaced from some positions but not others. That is, while (22S) is a permissible transformation of (22D), (24S) is not a permissible transformation of (24D). The ill-formedness of (25) is striking, since one can sensibly ask whether or not the boy who was happy sang. One can also ask whether or not (26) is true. But (27) is not the yes/no question corresponding to (26). Rather, (27) is the yes/no question corresponding to ‘The boy who lost was kept crying’, which has an unexpected meaning. So we want some account of why (27) cannot have the interpretation corresponding to (26). But the “negative fact” concerning (27) is precisely what one would expect if ‘was’ cannot be displaced from its position in (26). By contrast, if we merely specify an algorithm that associates (27) with its actual meaning—or if we merely hypothesize that (27) is the English translation of a certain mental sentence—we have not yet explained why (27) cannot also be used to ask whether or not (26) is true. Explanations of such facts appeal to nonobvious grammatical structure, and constraints on natural language transformations. (For example, an auxiliary verb in a relative clause cannot be “fronted;” though of course, theorists try to find deeper explanations for such constraints.) The idea was that a sentence has both a deep structure (DS), which reflects semantically relevant relations between verbs and their arguments, and a surface structure (SS) that may include displaced (or pleonastic) elements. In some cases, pronunciation might depend on further transformations of SS, resulting in a distinct “phonological form” (PF). Linguists posited various constraints on these levels of grammatical structure, and the transformations that relate them. But as the theory was elaborated and refined under empirical pressure, various facts that apparently called for explanation in these terms still went unexplained. This suggested another level of grammatical structure, perhaps obtained by a different kind of transformation on SS. The hypothesized level was called ‘LF’ (intimating ‘logical form’); and the hypothesized transformation—called quantifier raising because it targeted the kinds of expressions that indicate (restricted) quantifiers—mapped structures like (28S) onto structures like (28L). Clearly, (28L) does not reflect the pronounced word order in English. But the idea was that (PF) determines pronunciation, while LF was said to be the level at which the scope of a natural language quantifier is determined; see May (1985). If we think about ‘every’ as a kind of second-order transitive predicate, which can combine with two predictes like ‘doctor’ and ‘Juliet likes ( _ )i’ to form a complete sentence, we should expect that at some level of analysis, the sentence ‘Juliet likes every doctor’ has the structure indicated in (28L). And mapping (28L) to the logical form ‘[∀x:Doctor(x)]{Likes(Juliet, x)}’ is trivial. Similarly, if the surface structure (29S) can be mapped onto (29L) or (29L'), then (29S) can be mapped onto the logical forms ‘[∃x:Boy(x)][∀y:Doctor(y)]{Likes(x, y)}’ and ‘[∀y:Doctor(y)][∃x:Boy(x)]{Likes(x, y)}’. This assimilates quantifier scope ambiguity to the structural ambiguity of examples like ‘Juliet saw the boy with binoculars’. More generally, many apparent examples of grammar/logic mismatches were rediagnosed as mismatches between different aspects of grammatical structure—between those aspects that determine pronunication, and those that determine interpretation. In one sense, this is fully in keeping with the idea that in natural language, “surface appearances” are often misleading with regard to propositional structure. But it also makes room for the idea that grammatical structure and logical structure converge, in ways that can be discovered through investigation, once we move beyond traditional subject-predicate conceptions of structure with regard to both logic and grammar. There is independent evidence for “covert” transformations—displacement of expressions from their audible positions, as in (28L); see Huang (1995), Hornstein (1995). Consider, for example, the French translation of ‘Who did John see’: Jean a vu qui. If we assume that qui (‘who’) is displaced at  LF, then we can explain why the question-word is understood in both French and English like a quantifier binding a variable: which person x is such that John saw x? Similarly, example (30) from Chinese is transliterated as in (31). But (30) is ambiguous, between the interrogative (31a) and the complex declarative (31b). This suggests covert displacement of the quantificational question-word in Chinese; see Huang (1982, 1995). Chomsky (1981) also argued that the constraints on such displacement can help explain contrasts like the one illustrated with (32) and (33). In (32), the pronoun ‘he’ can have a bound-variable reading: which person x is such that x said that x has the best smile. This suggests that the following grammatical structure is possible: Whoi {[(  )i said [hei has the best smile]]}. But (33) cannot be used to ask this question, suggesting that some linguistic constraint rules out the following structure: And there cannot be constraints on transformations without transformations. So if English overtly displaces question-words that are covertly displaced in other languages, we should not be surprised if English covertly displaces other quantificational expressions like ‘every doctor’. Likewise, (34) has the reading indicated in (34a) but not the reading indicated in (34b). This suggests that ‘every doctor’ gets displaced, but only so far. Similarly, (13) cannot mean that every doctor is such that no patient who saw that doctor is healthy. As we have already seen, English seems to abhor fronting certain elements from within an embedded relative clause. This invites the hypothesis that quantifier raising is subject to a similar constraint, and hence, that there is quantifier-raising in English. This hypothesis is controversial; see, e.g., Jacobson (1999). But many linguists (following Chomsky [1995, 2000]) would now posit only two levels of grammatical structure, corresponding to PF and LF—the thought being that constraints on DS and SS can be eschewed in favor of a simpler theory that only posits constraints on how expressions can be combined in the course of constructing complex expressions that can be pronounced and interpreted. If this development of earlier theories proves correct, then the only semantically relevant level of grammatical structure often reflects covert displacement of audible expressions; see, e.g., Hornstein (1995). In any case, there is a large body of work suggesting that many logical properties of quantifiers, names, and pronouns are reflected in properties of LF. For example, if (35) is true, it follows that some doctor treated some doctor; whereas (36) does not have this consequence: The truth conditions of (35–36) seem to be as indicated in (35a) and (36a). This suggests that ‘himself’ is behaving like a variable bound by ‘the doctor’, while ‘every boy’ can bind ‘him’. And there are independent grammatical reasons for saying that ‘himself’ must be linked to ‘the doctor’, while ‘him’ must not be so linked. Note that in ‘Pat thinks Chris treated himself/him’, the antecedent of ‘himself’ must be the subject of ‘treated’, while the antecedent of ‘him’ must not be. We still need to enforce the conceptual distinction between LF and the traditional notion of logical form. There is no guarantee that structural features of natural language sentences will mirror the logical features of propositions; cp. Stanley (2000), King (2007). But this leaves room for the empirical hypothesis that LF reflects at least a great deal of propositional structure; see Harman (1972), Higginbotham (1986), Segal (1989), Larson and Ludlow (1993), and the essay on structured propositions.   Moreover, even if the LF of a sentence S underdetermines the logical form of the proposition a speaker expresses with S (on a given occasion of use), the LF may provide a “scaffolding” that can be elaborated in particular contexts, with little or no mismatch between grammatical and propositional architecture. If some such view is correct, it might avoid certain (unpleasant) questions prompted by earlier Fregean views: how can a sentence indicate a proposition with a different structure; and if grammar is deeply misleading, why think that our intuitions concerning impeccability provide reliable evidence about which propositions follow from which?  These are, however, issues that remain unsettled.