 On the other hand, more recent work on quantifiers suggests that the divergence had been exaggerated, in part because of how Frege's idea of variable-binding was originally implemented. Consider again the proposition that some boy sang, and the proposed logical division into the quantifier and the rest: ∃x[Boy(x) & Sang(x)]; something is both a boy and an individual that sang.  This is one way to regiment the English sentence. But one can also offer a logical paraphrase that more closely parallels the grammatical division between ‘some boy’ and ‘sang’: for some individual x such that x is a boy, x sang. One can formalize this paraphrase with restricted quantifiers, which incorporate a restriction on the domain over which the variable in question ranges. For example, ‘∃x:B(x)’ can be an existential quantifier that binds a variable ranging over the boys in the relevant domain, with ‘∃x:B(x)[S(x)]’ being true iff some boy sang. Since ‘∃x:B(x)[S(x)]’ and ‘∃x[B(x) & S(x)]’ are logically equivalent, logic provides no reason for preferring the latter regimentation of the English sentence. And choosing the latter does not show that the proposition expressed with ‘Some boy sang’ has a structure that differs from grammatical structure of the sentence. Universal quantifiers can also be restricted, as in ‘∀x:B(x)[S(x)]’, interpreted as follows: for every individual x such that x is a boy, x sang.  Restrictors can also be logically complex, as in ‘Some boy from Canada sang’ or ‘Some boy who respects Mary sang’, rendered as ‘∃x:B(x) & F(x, c)[S(x)]’ and ‘∃x:B(x) & R(x, m)[S(x)]’. Given these representations, the inferential difference between ‘some boy sang’ and ‘every boy sang’ lies with the propositional contributions of ‘some’ and ‘every’ after all, and not partly with the contribution of connectives like ‘&’ and ‘→’. Words like ‘someone’, and the grammatical requirement that ‘every’ be followed by a noun (or noun phrase), reflect the fact that natural language employs restricted quantifiers. Phrases like ‘every boy’ are composed of a determiner and a noun. Correspondingly, one can think of determiners as expressions that can combine with an ordered pair of predicates to form a sentence, much as one can think of transitive verbs as expressions that can combine with an ordered pair of names to form a sentence. And this grammatical analogy, between determiners and transitive verbs, has a semantic correlate. Since ‘x’ and ‘y’ are variables ranging over individuals, one can say that the function indicated by the transitive verb ‘likes’ yields the value T given the ordered pair 〈x,y〉 as argument if and only if x likes y. In this notational scheme, ‘y’ corresponds to the direct object (or internal argument), which combines with the verb to form a phrase; ‘x’ corresponds to the grammatical subject (or external argument) of the verb. If we think about ‘every boy sang’ analogously, ‘boy’ is the internal argument of ‘every’, since ‘every boy’ is a phrase. By contrast, ‘boy’ and ‘sang’ do not form a phrase in ‘every boy sang’. So let us introduce ‘X’ and ‘Y’ as second-order variables ranging over functions, from individuals to truth values, stipulating that the extension of such a function is the set of things that the function maps onto the truth value T. Then one can say that the function indicated by ‘every’ yields the value T given the ordered pair 〈X, Y〉 as argument iff the extension of X includes the extension of Y.  Similarly, one can say that the function indicated by ‘some’ maps the ordered pair 〈X, Y〉 onto T iff the extension of X intersects with the extension of Y. Just as we can describe ‘likes’ as a predicate satisfied by ordered pairs 〈x, y〉 such that x likes y, so we can think about ‘every’ as a predicate satisfied by ordered pairs 〈X, Y〉 such that the extension of X includes the extension of Y. (This is compatible with thinking about ‘every boy’ as a restricted quantifier that combines with a predicate to form a sentence that is true iff every boy satisfies that predicate.) One virtue of this notational scheme is that it lets us represent relations between predicates that cannot be captured with ‘∀’, ‘∃’, and the sentential connectives; see Rescher (1962), Wiggins (1980). For example, most boys sang iff the boys who sang outnumber the boys who did not sing. So we can say that ‘most’ indicates a function that maps 〈X, Y〉 to T iff the number of things that both Y and X map to T exceeds the number of things that Y but not X maps to T. Using restricted quantifiers, and thinking about determiners as devices for indicating relations between functions, also suggests an alternative to Russell's treatment of ‘the’. The formula ‘∃x{B(x) & ∀y[B(y) → x = y] & S(x)}’ can be rewritten as ‘∃x:B(x)[S(x)] & |B| = 1’, interpreted as follows: for some individual x such that x a boy, x sang, and the number of (relevant) boys is exactly one. On this view, ‘the boy’ still does not correspond to a constituent of the formalism; nor does ‘the’. But one can depart farther from Russell's notation, while emphasizing his idea that ‘the’ is relevantly like ‘some’ and ‘every’. For one can analyze ‘the boy sang’ as ‘!x:Boy(x)[Sang(x)]’, specifying the propositional contribution of ‘!’—on a par with as ‘∃’ and ‘∀’—as follows: This way of encoding Russell's theory preserves his central claim. While there may be a certain boy that a speaker refers to in saying ‘The boy sang’, that boy is not a constituent of the quantificational proposition expressed with ‘!x:Boy(x)[Sang(x)]’; see Neale (1990) for discussion. But far from showing that the logical form of ‘The boy sang’ diverges dramatically from its grammatical form, the restricted quantifier notation suggests that the logical form closely parallels the grammatical form. For ‘the boy’ and ‘the’ do correspond to constituents of ‘!x:B(x)[S(x)]’, at least if we allow for logical forms that represent quantificational propositions in terms of second-order relations; see Montague (1970). It is worth noting, briefly, an implication of this point for the inference ‘The boy sang, so some boy sang’. If the logical form of ‘The boy sang’ is ‘∃x:B(x)[S(x)] & |B|=1’, then the inference is an instance of the schema ‘A & B, so A’. But if the logical form of ‘The boy sang’ is simply ‘!(x):B(x)[S(x)]’, the premise and conclusion have the same form, differing only by substitution of ‘!’ for ‘∃’. In which case, the impeccability of the inference depends on the specific contributions of ‘the/!’ and ‘some/∃’.  Only when these contributions are “spelled out,” perhaps in terms of set-intersection, would the validity of the inference be manifest; see King (2002). So even if grammar and logic do not diverge in this case, one might say that grammatical structure does not reveal the logical structure. From this perspective, further analysis of ‘the’ is required. Those who are skeptical of an analytic/synthetic distinction can say that it remains more a decision than a discovery to say that ‘Some boy sang’ follows from ‘The boy sang’. In general, and especially with regard to aspects of propositional form indicated with individual words, issues about logical form are connected with issues about the  analytic-synthetic distinction.