 Generally, those who, like informational theorists, think relations to one’s (natural or social) environment are (at least partially) determinative of the content of mental representations are externalists, or anti-individualists (e.g., Burge 1979, 1986b, 2010, McGinn 1977), whereas those who, like some proponents of functional theories, think representational content is determined by an individual’s intrinsic properties alone, are internalists (or individualists; cf. Putnam 1975, Fodor  1981c).[5] This issue is widely taken to be of central importance, since psychological explanation, whether commonsense or scientific, is supposed to be both causal and content-based. (Beliefs and desires cause the behaviors they do because they have the contents they do. For example, the desire that one have a beer and the beliefs that there is beer in the refrigerator and that the refrigerator is in the kitchen may explain one’s getting up and going to the kitchen.) If, however, a mental representation’s having a particular content is due to factors extrinsic to it, it is unclear how its having that content could determine its causal powers, which, arguably, must be intrinsic (see Stich 1983, Fodor 1982, 1987, 1994). Some who accept the standard arguments for externalism have argued that internal factors determine a component of the content of a mental representation. They say that mental representations have both “narrow” content (determined by intrinsic factors) and “wide” or “broad” content (determined by narrow content plus extrinsic factors). (This distinction may be applied to the sub-personal representations of cognitive science as well as to those of commonsense psychology. See von Eckardt 1993: 189.) Narrow content has been variously construed. Putnam (1975), Fodor (1982: 114; 1994: 39ff), and Block (1986: 627ff), for example, seem to understand it as something like de dicto content (i.e., Fregean sense, or perhaps character, à la Kaplan 1989). On this construal, narrow content is context-independent and directly expressible. Fodor (1987) and Block (1986), however, have also characterized narrow content as radically inexpressible. On this construal, narrow content is a kind of proto-content, or content-determinant, and can be specified only indirectly, via specifications of context/wide-content pairings. On both construals, narrow contents are characterized as functions from context to (wide) content. The narrow content of a representation is determined by properties intrinsic to it or its possessor, such as its syntactic structure or its intramental computational or inferential role. Burge (1986b) has argued that causation-based worries about externalist individuation of psychological content, and the introduction of the narrow notion, are misguided. Fodor (1994, 1998) has more recently urged that a scientific psychology might not need narrow content in order to supply naturalistic (causal) explanations of human cognition and action, since the sorts of cases they were introduced to handle, viz., Twin-Earth cases and Frege cases, are either nomologically impossible or dismissible as exceptions to non-strict psychological laws. On the most common versions of externalism, though intentional contents are externally determined, mental representations themselves, and the states they partly constitute, remain “in the head.” More radical versions are possible. One might maintain that since thoughts are individuated by their contents, and some thought contents are partially constituted by objects external to the mind, then some thoughts are partly constituted by objects external to the mind. On such a view, a singular thought – i.e., a thought about a particular object – literally contains the object it is about. It is “object-involving.” Such a thought (and the mind that thinks it) thus extend beyond the boundaries of the skull. (This appears to be the view articulated in McDowell 1986, on which there is “interpenetration” between the mind and the world.) See the entries on  externalism about mental content  and  narrow mental content. Clark and Chalmers (1998) and Clark (2001, 2005, 2008) have argued that mental representations may exist entirely “outside the head.” On their view, which they call “active externalism,” cognitive processes (e.g., calculation) may be realized in external media (e.g., a calculator or pen and paper), and the “coupled system” of the individual mind and the external workspace ought to count as a cognitive system – a mind –in its own right. Symbolic representations on external media would thus count as mental representations. Clark and Chalmers’s paper has inspired a burgeoning literature on extended, embodied and interactive cognition. (Menary 2010 is a recent collection of essays. See also the entry on  embodied cognition.)