 The contents of mental representations are typically taken to be abstract objects (properties, relations, propositions, sets, etc.). A pressing question, especially for the naturalist, is how mental representations come to have their contents. Here the issue is not how to naturalize content (abstract objects can’t be naturalized), but, rather, how to specify naturalistic content-determining relations between mental representations and the abstract objects they express. There are two basic types of contemporary naturalistic theories of content-determination and causal-informational and  functional.[3] Causal-informational theories (Dretske 1981, 1988, 1995) hold that the content of a mental representation is grounded in the information it carries about what does (Devitt 1996) or would (Fodor 1987, 1990a) cause it to  occur.[4]  There is, however, widespread agreement that causal-informational relations are not sufficient to determine the content of mental representations. Such relations are common, but representation is not. Tree trunks, smoke, thermostats and ringing telephones carry information about what they are causally related to, but they do not represent (in the relevant sense) what they carry information about. A mental representation can be caused by something it does not represent, and can represent something that has not caused it, whereas nothing can be caused by something that doesn’t cause it. The main attempts to specify what makes a causal-informational state a mental representation are Asymmetric Dependency Theories (e.g., Fodor 1987, 1990a, 1994) and Teleological Theories (Dretske 1988, 1995, Fodor 1990b, Millikan 1984, Neander 2017, Papineau 1987). The Asymmetric Dependency Theory distinguishes merely informational relations from representational relations on the basis of their higher-order relations to each other: informational relations depend upon representational relations, but not vice versa. For example, if tokens of a mental state type are reliably caused by horses, cows-on-dark-nights, zebras-in-the-mist and Great Danes, then they carry information about horses, etc. If, however, such tokens are caused by cows-on-dark-nights, etc. because they were caused by horses, but not vice versa, then they represent horses (or the property horse). According to Teleological Theories, representational relations are those a representation-producing mechanism has the selected (by evolution or learning) function of establishing. For example, zebra-caused horse-representations do not mean zebra, because the mechanism by which such tokens are produced has the selected function of indicating horses, not zebras. The horse-representation-producing mechanism that responds to zebras is malfunctioning. See the entries on   teleological theories of mental content  and   causal theories of mental content. Functional theories (Block 1986, Harman 1973), hold that the content of a mental representation is determined, at least in part, by its (causal, computational, inferential) relations to other mental representations. They differ on whether relata should include all other mental representations or only some of them, and on whether to include external states of affairs. The view that the content of a mental representation is determined by its inferential/computational relations with all other representations is holism; the view it is determined by relations to only some other mental states is localism (or molecularism). (The non-functional view that the content of a mental state depends on none of its relations to other mental states is atomism.) Functional theories that recognize no content-determining external relata have been called solipsistic (Harman 1987). Some theorists posit distinct roles for internal and external connections, the former determining semantic properties analogous to sense, the latter determining semantic properties analogous to reference (McGinn 1982, Sterelny 1989). (Reductive) representationalists (Dretske, Lycan, Tye) usually take one or another of these theories to provide an explanation of the (non-conceptual) content of experiential states. They thus tend to be externalists (see the next section) about phenomenological as well as conceptual content. Phenomenalists and non-reductive representationalists (Block, Chalmers, Loar, Peacocke, Siewert), on the other hand, take it that the representational content of such states is (at least in part) determined by their intrinsic phenomenal properties. Further, those who advocate a phenomenally-based approach to conceptual content (Horgan and Tienson, Kriegel, Loar, Pitt, Searle, Siewert) also seem to be committed to internalist individuation of the content (if not the reference) of such states. Persistent indeterminacy problems with causal-informational-teleological theories of content determination have motivated a growing number of (analytic) philosophers to seek a different approach, grounded not in external relations of representational states but in their intrinsic phenomenal properties. This approach has come to be known as the “Phenomenal Intentionality Research Program” (Kriegel 2013), or, simply “Phenomenal Intentionality.” These philosophers (including Bourget, Kriegel, Loar, Mendelovici, Montague, Pitt, Searle, Smithies (2012, 2013a and b, 2019), Strawson and Siewert), argue that causal-informational-teleological relations cannot yield the fine-grained, determinate content conceptual and perceptual representations possess, and that such content can only be delivered by phenomenal character. The cognitive phenomenology thesis (discussed above) is an important component of this overall approach.