 The issue’s significance can be seen by considering how the argument is embedded in the structure of Philosophical Investigations. Immediately prior to the introduction of the argument (§§241f), Wittgenstein suggests that the existence of the rules governing the use of language and making communication possible depends on agreement in human behaviour—such as the uniformity in normal human reaction which makes it possible to train most children to look at something by pointing at it. (Unlike cats, which react in a seemingly random variety of ways to pointing.) One function of the private language argument is to show that not only actual languages but the very possibility of language and concept formation depends on the possibility of such agreement. Another, related, function is to oppose the idea that metaphysical absolutes are within our reach, that we can find at least part of the world as it really is in the sense that any other way of conceiving that part must be wrong (cf. Philosophical Investigations p. 230). Philosophers are especially tempted to suppose that numbers and sensations are examples of such absolutes, self-identifying objects which themselves force upon us the rules for the use of their names. Wittgenstein discusses numbers in earlier sections on rules (185–242). Some of his points have analogues in his discussion of sensations, for there is a common underlying confusion about how the act of meaning determines the future application of a formula or name. In the case of numbers, one temptation is to confuse the mathematical sense of ‘determine’ in which, say, the formula y = 2x determines the numerical value of y for a given value of x (in contrast with y > 2x, which does not) with a causal sense in which a certain training in mathematics determines that normal people will always write the same value for y given both the first formula and a value for x—in contrast with creatures for which such training might produce a variety of outcomes (cf. §189). This confusion produces the illusion that the result of an actual properly conducted calculation is the inevitable outcome of the mathematical determining, as though the formula’s meaning itself were shaping the course of events. In the case of sensations, the parallel temptation is to suppose that they are self-intimating. Itching, for example, seems like this: one just feels what it is directly; if one then gives the sensation a name, the rules for that name’s subsequent use are already determined by the sensation itself. Wittgenstein tries to show that this impression is illusory, that even itching derives its identity only from a sharable practice of expression, reaction and use of language. If itching were a metaphysical absolute, forcing its identity upon me in the way described, then the possibility of such a shared practice would be irrelevant to the concept of itching: the nature of itching would be revealed to me in a single mental act of naming it (the kind of mental act which Russell called ‘acquaintance’); all subsequent facts concerning the use of the name would be irrelevant to how that name was meant; and the name could be private. The private language argument is intended to show that such subsequent facts could not be irrelevant, that no names could be private, and that the notion of having the true identity of a sensation revealed in a single act of acquaintance is a confusion. The suggestion that a language could be private in the way described appears most openly in the second of Bertrand Russell’s published lectures ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’, where Russell says: In a logically perfect language, there will be one word and no more for every simple object, and everything that is not simple will be expressed by a combination of words, by a combination derived, of course, from the words for the simple things that enter in, one word for each simple component. A language of that sort will be completely analytic, and will show at a glance the logical structure of the facts asserted or denied. … A logically perfect language, if it could be constructed, would not only be intolerably prolix, but, as regards its vocabulary, would be very largely private to one speaker. That is to say, all the names that it would use would be private to that speaker and could not enter into the language of another speaker. … A name, in the narrow logical sense of a word whose meaning is a particular, can only be applied to a particular with which the speaker is acquainted, because you cannot name anything you are not acquainted with. … One can use ‘this’ as a name to stand for a particular with which one is acquainted at the moment. We say ‘This is white’. … But if you try to apprehend the proposition that I am expressing when I say ‘This is white’, you cannot do it. If you mean this piece of chalk as a physical object, then you are not using a proper name. It is only when you use ‘this’ quite strictly, to stand for an actual object of sense [i.e., a sense-datum], that it is really a proper name. And in that it has a very odd property for a proper name, namely that it seldom means the same thing two moments running and does not mean the same thing to the speaker and to the hearer. … [I]n order to understand a name for a particular, the only thing necessary is to be acquainted with that particular. When you are acquainted with that particular, you have a full, adequate and complete understanding of the name, and no further information is required. Although Wittgenstein does not explicitly say so, it is likely that this is the inspiration of his argument: his writing is marked in many places by criticism of Russell, both explicit and otherwise. In this context, we should take a moment to note a set of issues of increasing interest, namely, ones found in Cora Diamond’s claim in ‘Does Bismarck Have a Beetle In His Box’ that: The Tractatus provides us with arguments against the Russellian idea of someone else’s private object, the beetle in Bismarck’s box. It lets us see that any such beetle would have no role in language or thought, but it left unmolested the beetle in one’s own box. Russell’s conception of how we can think about things in the minds of others was subjected to a critique, but the Tractatus left unexamined a questionable conception of what it is for our words to be about things in our own minds. (p. 283) It would not be until post-Tractarian work that Wittgenstein would turn his attention to question of private objects in one’s own mind.  Regarding Russell, as Diamond sees it, his commitment both to private objects and their possibility/admissibility comes primarily from his views on knowledge by acquaintance in contrast to knowledge by description, an important part of which is his holding that “…the chief importance of knowledge by description is that it enables us to pass beyond the limits of our private experience. In spite of the fact that we can only know truths which are wholly composed of terms which we have experienced in acquaintance, we can yet have knowledge by description of things which we have never experienced” (quoted in Diamond [2000], p. 267). Further, according to Diamond, it is Russell’s understanding and use of quantification that he employs to provide a way to get around the problem of not being acquainted with the ‘private’ objects in the minds of others. While Bismarck knows by direct acquaintance the meaning of ‘This is excruciating’ said of his sensation, another can only say, ‘Bismarck’s sensation is excruciating’. However, this can be meaningful once we understand that the its meaning is to be analyzed in terms of, ‘Something is a sensation, had now by Bismarck, and it is excruciating’ (p. 273). Once she has identified the importance of the issue of privacy for Russell, and laid out the details of his position, she is primarily concerned to show how Wittgenstein’s views in the Tractatus (particularly on quantification, logical space, and there not being logical objects that serve as the referents of terms such as ‘some’ and ‘all’) undermine Russell’s position on quantification and private objects in other people’s minds. Further, she argues, briefly, for the importance of there being a ‘private language argument’ in the Tractatus along two main lines. First, she takes it to be important for our understanding of Wittgenstein’s work and its development (and here her argument is firmly in line with her Pyrrhonian and resolute reading of the Tractatus and its continuity with Wittgenstein’s later work). Second, she takes it to have implications for Michael Dummett’s way of framing the realism and anti-realism issue, especially as it relates to the Tractatus. Against Dummett, she sees the Tractatus as putting forward an anti-realist position, “…at any rate about other people’s private objects” (p. 284). As this entry is focused on the private language considerations found primarily in the Philosophical Investigations, we will not go into further detail regarding Diamond’s argument. However, as noted above, the issues she raises are of increasing interest both directly and indirectly. Directly, they are engaged by William Child’s recent ’Does the Tractatus contain a private language argument?’ in which he argues that Diamond is more or less wrong across the board in her main contentions regarding there being a private language argument in the Tractatus and her assessment of the Tractatus as anti-realist. His central contention is that Diamond projects views attributable to the later Wittgenstein into the Tractatus, particularly those concerning naming and use. However, he also argues that Wittgenstein’s 1929 views on sensation language ‘challenge’ ‘new’ readings of the Tractatus, such as Diamond’s, where by ‘new readings’ he means ones that, “find in the Tractatus an absence of positive philosophical doctrines, a kind of quietism, and an explicitly therapeutic approach that have traditionally been associated with Wittgenstein’s later philosophy” (p. 143). Indirectly, Diamond’s piece is in line with an increasing interest in questions of how to read Wittgenstein, such as those we noted above in our discussion of the resolute-substantial and Pyrrhonian-non-Pyrrhonian ‘Wittgensteins’. The issues raised in these contexts have further relevance for understanding other central Wittgensteinian themes such as how best to respond to the temptations of solipsism (see Stern [2010] for a helpful overview of many of these issues; he does not discuss Diamond directly, but he does focus on the question of the development of Wittgenstein’s thought and, for example, the question of solipsism in the context of private language considerations. Another recent example of interest in Wittgenstein’s philosophical development, and explicitly one that concerns private language, is Nielson [2008]). To return to our exposition of the private language concerns found in the Philosophical Investigations, in distinction from Russell’s work, for example, the idea of a private language is more usually hidden: the confusions supposed to belong to it allegedly underlie a range of articulated philosophical notions and theories, without themselves being so articulated. The argument is thus perhaps most profitably read as targeting, not any particular theory, but rather the motivation for considering a range of apparently independent or even competing theories along with their associated tasks, problems and solutions. For example, a still very common idea, often attributed to John Locke and openly embraced by Jerry Fodor in the nineteen seventies, is that interpersonal spoken communication works by speakers’ translation of their internal mental vocabularies into sounds followed by hearers’ re-translation into their own internal vocabularies. Again, Descartes considered himself able to talk to himself about his experiences while claiming to be justified in saying that he does not know (or not until he has produced a reassuring philosophical argument) anything at all about an external world conceived as something independent of them. And he and others have thought: while I may make mistakes about the external world, I can infallibly avoid error if I confine my judgments to my immediate sensations. (Compare The Principles of Philosophy, I, 9.) Again, many philosophers, including John Stuart Mill, have supposed there to be a problem of other minds, according to which I may reasonably doubt the legitimacy of applying, say, sensation-words to beings other than myself. In each of these examples, the implication is that the internal vehicle of my musings could in principle be private (as Kenny [1966, p. 369] showed, this vehicle does not have to be a language for the argument to apply to it): for these problems and theories even to make sense, sharability must be irrelevant to meaning and it must be at least conceivable that my knowledge, even my understanding, is necessarily confined to my own case. The implication is of course often denied. The terms of Fodor’s language of thought, for example, are supposed to be able to refer to public objects. But the question is, on what basis does this ability rest? However this question should be answered, Fodor himself was concerned enough about Wittgenstein’s argument to try to show both that it did not apply to his views and—apparently superfluously—that it is not a good argument anyway (Fodor pp. 68–73). The matter is clearer with Descartes (compare Kenny 1966): for his sceptical question to be raised without being immediately self-defeating, he must hold it possible to identify his experiences inwardly—where ‘inwardly’ means without relying on resources supplied by his essential embodiment in a world whose existence is independent of his own mind and accessible to others (e.g., such resources as the concepts acquired in a normal upbringing). The question which accordingly looms large in the private language argument is: How is this identification of one’s experiences to be achieved? However, it cannot be emphasized too strongly that the significance of the private language argument does not rest on the scholarly detail of whether this or that thinker can be correctly described as committed to the idea. The target is a way of thinking which generates philosophical theories, not the theories themselves.