 If one conceives of a state of affairs as complexes that “contain” particulars and properties, one needs to answer the unity-question “What unifies some particulars and properties into one state of affairs?” An answer to this question should distinguish states of affairs from other complexes. Frege pressed this point in his letters to Wittgenstein: Is every connection of objects a state of affairs? Does it not also depend on how the connection is produced? What is the tie? Can this perhaps be gravitation, as with the system of planets? Is it [the system of planets] a state of affairs? (Frege 1919: 20, my translation) The solar system consists of the sun and the planets pulled into orbit around it by gravity. If this does not qualify as a state of affairs then there must be some relation independent of gravitation that unites the things involved in a state of affairs. What distinguishes this complex physical object from the state of affairs the sun’s pulling the planets into orbit by gravity? If the latter contains the sun and the planets and the pulling-by gravity relation, the distinction between the states of affairs and solar system must lie in what unites their elements. Russell argued that there is no plausible answer to the unity-question for states of affairs (he called them “propositions”). He explains his main worry about states of affairs as follows: Our disbelief in their [propositions’] reality may be reinforced by asking ourselves what kind of entity a false proposition could be. Let us take some very simple false proposition, say “A precedes B”, when in fact A comes after B. It seems as though nothing were involved here beyond A and B and “preceding” and the general form of dual complexes. But since A does not precede B, these objects are not put together in the way indicated in the proposition. It seems, therefore, that nothing which is actually composed of these objects is the proposition; and it is not credible that anything further enters the proposition. (Russell 1913: 109–10; for a detailed discussion of this argument see Wetzel 1998) What unifies A, B and the relation of Preceding to the fact that A precedes B? A’s actually preceding B. What unifies A, B and the relation of Preceding to the state of affairs A’s preceding B? If A does not precede B, the unity of the state of affairs cannot consist in A being actually related by the preceding relation to B. So far Russell has only shown that the unity of a state of affairs A’s standing in R to B does not consist in A’s standing in R to B. In addition, he has imposed a constraint on answers to the unity-question. He says that it is not credible that there is a unifying element that is not a constituent of the state of affairs. Russell himself couldn’t find an answer to the unity-question that met his constraint. Hence, he tried to eliminate states of affairs. While Russell does not refute the view that there are states of affairs, he asks philosophers who believe in them a difficult question. To see the force of the constraint he imposes on answers to the unity-question consider a proposal that violates it. External theories develop the following general idea (I take the “external/internal” terminology from Valicella 2000): The state of affairs a’s being F exists if, and only if, there is something distinct from a, being F and a’s being F & it unifies a and being F to form a’s being F. Roughly speaking, the external unifier can bring the constituents of states of affairs together even if they don’t constitute a fact. A psychological version of the External Theory is proposed in Valicella 2000. According to him, the external ground of unity is the judging consciousness that brings about the unity of a state of affairs (Valicella 2000: 252). Russell, in turn, argued that a mental act cannot unify some things to form a state of affairs: Suppose we wish to understand “A and B are similar”. It is essential that our thought should, as is said, “unite” or “synthesize” the two terms and the relation; but we cannot actually “unite” them, since either A and B are similar, in which case they are already united, or they are dissimilar, in which case no amount of thinking can force them to be united. (Russell 1913: 116) Any mental activity seems simply to be unable to create unity where none obtains already. If I think of a and being F, why should a new complex object consisting of them come into existence? Russell himself goes on to suppose that the mind is able to unite A, B and similarity with a logical form. How the mind can have that ability goes unexplained. The linguistic version of the External Theory takes states of affairs to be descripta of sentences that owe their unity to the sentences that describe them: The state of affairs a’s being F exists if, and only if, there is a sentence of a language L (or an extension of L) that concatenates a singular term referring to a and a general term referring to F. (see Taylor 1985: 29ff; King 2009: 263) The linguistic version gives up on the view that states of affairs are language independent (see King 2009: 259 who concedes this). There is nothing in our intuitive notion of states of affairs that justifies the assumption that states of affairs depend for their unity on the existence of a language in which they are described. For example, there will be a space of probable outcomes of an event whether there are descriptions of them or not. The criticism of the External Theory makes Russell’s constraint on an answer to the unity-question plausible. States of affairs are conceived of as sui generis entities that do not owe their unity and hence their identity to anything else. This brings us to Internal Theories that explain the unity of a state of affairs merely by appealing to its constituents. The state of affairs a’s being F exists if, and only if, a or being F or both unify the state of affairs. Ramsey describes (but does not endorse) the core of this view when he says: [I]n every atomic fact there must be one constituent which is in its own nature incomplete or connective and, as it were, holds the other constituents together. (Ramsey 1925: 408) For Wittgenstein in his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus there is no designated connector in a state of affairs. All constituents are incomplete and mutually complete each other: In a state of affairs objects fit into one another like the links in a chain. (Wittgenstein 1918: 2.03; Pears/McGuiness translation) So far we have only been given a necessary condition for the existence of a state of affairs. Among the things that enter into a state of affairs there must be at least one incomplete one. Wittgenstein will require incompleteness or connectivity of all things that enter a state of affairs. The notion of incompleteness at work here is difficult to explain. But one way to develop it is to propose that the incomplete and connecting elements are functions. For example, the property being F is conceived of as a function that takes a particular a as argument and maps it to the state of affairs  a’s being F (see Oliver 1992: 91). The problems of the functional model of states of affairs are manifest in the development of Frege’s work. Frege 1879 held that sentences stand for what he called “judgeable contents”, complexes composed of functions and objects. For Frege predication is the application of a function to an object. Judgeable contents seem to be nothing other than states of affairs. However, the idea that states of affairs are complex does not sit happily with Frege’s further idea that the judgeable content a’s being F is the value of the function F for a as argument. Now different functions have the same value for different arguments. For example, 3 is the value of the function Square root of x for 9 and the value of the function \(x+1\) for 2. Which of these arguments and functions is contained in the value 3? Since there is no principle that singles out one argument and function as constituting the value, we should abandon either the functional model of incompleteness or the idea that states of affairs have constituents. Later Frege takes the second option: The references of the parts of a sentence are not parts of the reference of the sentence. (Frege 1910–14: 87) Since different functions can have the same value for different arguments, Frege arrived at the view that a sentence that is either true or false refers to its truth-value, the True or the False. Every true (false) sentence has the same referent: the True (the False). States of affairs have no place in the Fregean theory of reference. The “case study” of Frege shows that the functional model of incompleteness undermines the very idea that states of affairs are complexes (for a reply to this argument see Gaskin 2008: 100). The strategy to explain the unity of a state of affairs by using the notion of incompleteness either only labels the problem or, if incomplete elements are taken to be functions, threatens the very idea of states of affairs. Can one dispense with the notion of incompleteness in an answer to the unity-question? The unity-question arises on a conception that takes states of affairs to be ontologically dependent entities. Take the state of affairs Aristotle’s being wise. It ontologically depends on Aristotle and being wise. So do the ordered pair \(\langle\)Aristotle, being wise\(\rangle\) and the mereological sum of Aristotle and being wise. What distinguishes them? If we follow Fine, the answer will invoke an operation that “generates” the entities in question. States of affairs are generated by predication, ordered pairs by another operation. Now saying that something is predicated of something else sounds as if the existence of a state of affairs depends on performing an act. But this is a misunderstanding. Johnston explains: [P]redicability guarantees predication. Whenever F-ness is predicable of a, there will be something that is the predication of F-ness to a. (Johnston 2006: 684) All the interesting work is done by the notion of predicability: The state of affairs a’s being F exists if, and only if, being F is predicable of a. When a property (relation) is predicable of some objects will be determined by a number of principles (or axioms) (Johnston 2006: 685). For example, particulars are not predicable of other particulars, n-place properties are only predicable of n particulars. It is part of the nature of the objects and properties on which a state of affairs ontologically depends that the properties are predicable of the objects. This brings us to a key thought of Wittgenstein’s theory of states of affairs: The nature of particulars and properties determines whether the second are predicable of the first or not. Wetzel (1998: 57) fills this suggestion out in an informative way. An object may be in a range of possible states due to its capacities. Given that the computer I am writing on belongs to a particular kind there is a range of possibilities for it to be: it might be broken, functioning well, be turned off etc. Its capacities and, broadly speaking, its nature is the “ontological ground of ranges of possible states of affairs in which [it is a constituent]” (1998: 57). One should add that the nature and capacities of an object also determine a range of impossibilities such as the impossibility of my computer’s becoming a sentient being. However, consider my computer’s being to the left of my lamp. This is a possibility for my computer, but it is a brute possibility not grounded in its causal powers. Hence, the range of states of affairs which contain a particular seems to be broader than the range of states of affairs determined by its capacities. If the property being F is predicable of the object a, the state of affairs a’s being F exists. Hence, states of affairs exist in virtue of the nature of objects and properties. No unifying relation or operation in addition to a and being F is required. What distinguishes states of affairs from other entities which ontologically depend on the same properties and particulars is that states of affairs exist because the properties are predicable of the particulars. This account assumes that if being F is predicable of a, there is a state of affairs a’s being F that ontologically depends on them. This move carries the problem posed by states of affairs to the right place: what are the restrictions on predicability? If one has answered this question, one has solved the unity problem for states of affairs.