 The “names” spoken of in the Tractatus are not mere signs (i.e., typographically or phonologically identified inscriptions), but rather signs-together-with-their-meanings — or “symbols.” Being symbols, names are identified and individuated only in the context of significant sentences. A name is “semantically simple” in the sense that its meaning does not depend on the meanings of its orthographic parts, even when those parts are, in other contexts, independently meaningful. So, for example, it would not count against the semantic simplicity of the symbol ‘Battle’ as it figures in the sentence “Battle commenced” that it contains the orthographic part, “Bat,” even though this part has a meaning of its own in other sentential contexts. For Wittgenstein, however, something else does count against this symbol’s semantic simplicity, namely, that it is analyzable away in favour of talk of the actions of people, etc. This point suggests that in natural language Tractarian names will be rare and hard to find. Even apparently simple singular terms such as ‘Obama,’ ‘London,’ etc., will not be counted as “names” by the strict standards of the Tractatus since they will disappear on further analysis. (Hereafter, ‘name’ will mean “Tractarian name” unless otherwise indicated.) It is a matter of controversy whether the Tractatus reserves the term ‘name’ for semantically simple symbols referring to particulars, or whether the term comprehends semantically simple symbols of all kinds. Since objects are just the referents of names, this issue goes hand in hand with the question whether objects are one and all particulars or whether they include properties and relations. The former view is defended by Irving Copi (Copi 1958) and Elizabeth Anscombe (Anscombe 1959, 108 ff), among others. It is supported by Tractatus 2.0231: “[Material properties] are first presented by propositions — first formed by the configuration of objects.” This might seem to suggest that simple properties are not objects but rather arise from the combining or configuring of objects. The Copi-Anscombe interpretation has been taken to receive further support from Tractatus 3.1432: This has suggested to some commentators that relations are not, strictly speaking, nameable, and so not Tractarian objects (see, for example, Ricketts, 1996, Section III). It may, however, be intended instead simply to bring out the point that Tractarian names are not confined to particulars, but include relations between particulars; so this consideration is less compelling. The opposing view, according to which names include predicates and relational expressions, has been defended by Erik Stenius and Merrill and Jaakko Hintikka, among others (Stenius, 1960, 61–69; Hintikka and Hintikka, 1986, 30–34). It is supported by a Notebooks entry from 1915 in which objects are explicitly said to include properties and relations (NB, 61). It is further buttressed by Wittgenstein’s explanation to Desmond Lee (in 1930–1) of Tractatus 2.01: “‘Objects’ also include relations; a proposition is not two things connected by a relation. ‘Thing’ and ‘relation’ are on the same level.” (LK, 120). The Anscombe-Copi reading treats the forms of elementary propositions as differing radically from anything we may be familiar with from ordinary — or even Fregean — grammar. It thus respects Wittgenstein’s warning to Waismann in 1929 that “The logical structure of elementary propositions need not have the slightest similarly with the logical structure of [non-elementary] propositions” (WWK, 42). Going beyond this, Wittgenstein seems once to have held that there  can be no resemblance between the apparent or surface forms of non-elementary propositions and the forms of elementary propositions. In “Some Remarks on Logical Form” (1929) he says: “One is often tempted to ask from an a priori standpoint: What, after all, can be the only forms of atomic propositions, and to answer, e.g., subject-predicate and the relational propositions with two or more terms further, perhaps, propositions relating predicates and relations with one another, and so on. But this, I believe, is a mere playing with words” (Klagge and Nordman, 1993, 30). A similar thought already occurs in a more compressed form in the Tractatus itself: “There cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of the elementary propositions. Only that which we ourselves construct can we foresee” (5.556). It is possible, then, that the options we began with represent a false dichotomy. Perhaps Wittgenstein simply did not have an antecedent opinion on the question whether Tractarian names will turn out to be names of particulars only, particulars and universals, or whatnot. And it may even be that he believed that the final analysis of language would (or might) reveal the names to defy such classifications altogether. This broader range of interpretive possibilities has only recently begun to receive the attention it deserves (See Johnston 2009).