 The first and most important thing to note about Wittgenstein’s later Philosophy of Mathematics is that RFM, first published in 1956, consists of selections taken from a number of manuscripts (1937–1944), most of one large typescript (1938), and three short typescripts (1938), each of which constitutes an Appendix to (RFM I). For this reason and because some manuscripts containing much material on mathematics (e.g., MS 123) were not used at all for RFM, philosophers have not been able to read Wittgenstein’s later remarks on mathematics as they were written in the manscripts used for RFM and they have not had access (until the 2000–2001 release of the Nachlass on CD-ROM) to much of Wittgenstein’s later work on mathematics. It must be emphasized, therefore, that this Encyclopedia article is being written during a transitional period. Until philosophers have used the Nachlass to build a comprehensive picture of Wittgenstein’s complete and evolving Philosophy of Mathematics, we will not be able to say definitively which views the later Wittgenstein retained, which he changed, and which he dropped. In the interim, this article will outline Wittgenstein’s later Philosophy of Mathematics, drawing primarily on RFM, to a much lesser extent LFM (1939 Cambridge lectures), and, where possible, previously unpublished material in Wittgenstein’s Nachlass. It should also be noted at the outset that commentators disagree about the continuity of Wittgenstein’s middle and later Philosophies of Mathematics. Some argue that the later views are significantly different from the intermediate views (Frascolla 1994; Gerrard 1991: 127, 131–32; Floyd 2005: 105–106), while others argue that, for the most part, Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics evolves from the middle to the later period without significant changes or renunciations (Wrigley 1993; Marion 1998). The remainder of this article adopts the second interpretation, explicating Wittgenstein’s later Philosophy of Mathematics as largely continuous with his intermediate views, except for the important introduction of an extra-mathematical application criterion. Perhaps the most important constant in Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics, middle and late, is that he consistently maintains that mathematics is our, human invention, and that, indeed, everything in mathematics is invented. Just as the middle Wittgenstein says that “[w]e make mathematics”, the later Wittgenstein says that we ‘invent’ mathematics (RFM I, §168; II, §38; V, §§5, 9 and 11; PG 469–70) and that “the mathematician is not a discoverer: he is an inventor” (RFM, Appendix II, §2; (LFM 22, 82). Nothing exists mathematically unless and until we have invented it. In arguing against mathematical discovery, Wittgenstein is not just rejecting Platonism, he is also rejecting a rather standard philosophical view according to which human beings invent mathematical calculi, but once a calculus has been invented, we thereafter discover finitely many of its infinitely many provable and true theorems. As Wittgenstein himself asks (RFM IV, §48), “might it not be said that the rules lead this way, even if no one went it?” If “someone produced a proof [of ‘Goldbach’s theorem’]”, “[c]ouldn’t one say”, Wittgenstein asks (LFM 144), “that the possibility of this proof was a fact in the realms of mathematical reality”—that “[i]n order [to] find it, it must in some sense be there”—“[i]t must be a possible structure”? Unlike many or most philosophers of mathematics, Wittgenstein resists the ‘Yes’ answer that we discover truths about a mathematical calculus that come into existence the moment we invent the calculus (PR §141; PG 283, 466; LFM 139). Wittgenstein rejects the modal reification of possibility as actuality—that provability and constructibility are (actual) facts—by arguing that it is at the very least wrong-headed to say with the Platonist that because “a straight line can be drawn between any two points,… the line already exists even if no one has drawn it”—to say “[w]hat in the ordinary world we call a possibility is in the geometrical world a reality” (LFM 144; RFM I, §21). One might as well say, Wittgenstein suggests (PG 374), that “chess only had to be discovered, it was always there!” At MS 122 (3v; Oct. 18, 1939), Wittgenstein once again emphasizes the difference between illusory mathematical discovery and genuine mathematical invention. I want to get away from the formulation: “I now know more about the calculus”, and replace it with “I now have a different calculus”. The sense of this is always to keep before one’s eyes the full scale of the gulf between a mathematical knowing and non-mathematical  knowing.[3] And as with the middle period, the later Wittgenstein similarly says (MS 121, 27r; May 27, 1938) that “[i]t helps if one says: the proof of the Fermat proposition is not to be discovered, but to be invented”. The difference between the ‘anthropological’ and the mathematical account is that in the first we are not tempted to speak of ‘mathematical facts’, but rather that in this account the facts are never mathematical ones, never make mathematical propositions true or false. (MS 117, 263; March 15, 1940) There are no mathematical facts just as there are no (genuine) mathematical propositions. Repeating his intermediate view, the later Wittgenstein says (MS 121, 71v; 27 Dec., 1938): “Mathematics consists of [calculi | calculations], not of propositions”. This radical constructivist conception of mathematics prompts Wittgenstein to make notorious remarks—remarks that virtually no one else would make—such as the infamous (RFM V, §9): “However queer it sounds, the further expansion of an irrational number is a further expansion of mathematics”. As in the middle period, the later Wittgenstein maintains that mathematics is essentially syntactical and non-referential, which, in and of itself, makes Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics anti-Platonist insofar as Platonism is the view that mathematical terms and propositions refer to objects and/or facts and that mathematical propositions are true by virtue of agreeing with mathematical facts. The later Wittgenstein, however, wishes to ‘warn’ us that our thinking is saturated with the idea of “[a]rithmetic as the natural history (mineralogy) of numbers” (RFM IV, §11). When, for instance, Wittgenstein discusses the claim that fractions cannot be ordered by magnitude, he says that this sounds ‘remarkable’ in a way that a mundane proposition of the differential calculus does not, for the latter proposition is associated with an application in physics, whereas this proposition … seems to [solely] concern… the natural history of mathematical objects themselves. (RFM II, §40) Wittgenstein stresses that he is trying to ‘warn’ us against this ‘aspect’—the idea that the foregoing proposition about fractions “introduces us to the mysteries of the mathematical world”, which exists somewhere as a completed totality, awaiting our prodding and our discoveries. The fact that we regard mathematical propositions as being about mathematical objects and mathematical investigation “as the exploration of these objects” is “already mathematical alchemy”, claims Wittgenstein (RFM V, §16), since it is not possible to appeal to the meaning [Bedeutung] of the signs in mathematics,… because it is only mathematics that gives them their meaning [Bedeutung]. Platonism is dangerously misleading, according to Wittgenstein, because it suggests a picture of pre-existence, predetermination and discovery that is completely at odds with what we find if we actually examine and describe mathematics and mathematical activity. “I should like to be able to describe”, says Wittgenstein (RFM IV, §13), “how it comes about that mathematics appears to us now as the natural history of the domain of numbers, now again as a collection of rules”. Wittgenstein, however, does not endeavour to refute Platonism. His aim, instead, is to clarify what Platonism is and what it says, implicitly and explicitly (including variants of Platonism that claim, e.g., that if a proposition is provable in an axiom system, then there already exists a path [i.e., a proof] from the axioms to that proposition (RFM I, §21; Marion 1998: 13–14, 226; Steiner 2000: 334). Platonism is either “a mere truism” (LFM 239), Wittgenstein says, or it is a ‘picture’ consisting of “an infinity of shadowy worlds” (LFM 145), which, as such, lacks ‘utility’ (cf. PI §254) because it explains nothing and it misleads at every turn. Though commentators and critics do not agree as to whether the later Wittgenstein is still a finitist and whether, if he is, his finitism is as radical as his intermediate rejection of unbounded mathematical quantification (Maddy 1986: 300–301, 310), the overwhelming evidence indicates that the later Wittgenstein still rejects the actual infinite (RFM V, §21; Zettel §274, 1947) and infinite mathematical extensions. The first, and perhaps most definitive, indication that the later Wittgenstein maintains his finitism is his continued and consistent insistence that irrational numbers are rules for constructing finite expansions, not infinite mathematical extensions. “The concepts of infinite decimals in mathematical propositions are not concepts of series”, says Wittgenstein (RFM V, §19), “but of the unlimited technique of expansion of series”. We are misled by “[t]he extensional definitions of functions, of real numbers etc”. (RFM V, §35), but once we recognize the Dedekind cut as “an extensional image”, we see that we are not “led to \(\sqrt{2}\) by way of the concept of a cut” (RFM V, §34). On the later Wittgenstein’s account, there simply is no property, no rule, no systematic means of defining each and every irrational number intensionally, which means there is no criterion “for the irrational numbers being complete” (PR §181). As in his intermediate position, the later Wittgenstein claims that ‘\(\aleph_0\)’ and “infinite series” get their mathematical uses from the use of ‘infinity’ in ordinary language (RFM II, §60). Although, in ordinary language, we often use ‘infinite’ and “infinitely many” as answers to the question “how many?”, and though we associate infinity with the enormously large, the principal use we make of ‘infinite’ and ‘infinity’ is to speak of the unlimited (RFM V, §14) and unlimited techniques (RFM II, §45; PI §218). This fact is brought out by the fact “that the technique of learning \(\aleph_0\) numerals is different from the technique of learning 100,000 numerals” (LFM 31). When we say, e.g., that “there are an infinite number of even numbers” we mean that we have a mathematical technique or rule for generating even numbers which is limitless, which is markedly different from a limited technique or rule for generating a finite number of numbers, such as 1–100,000,000. “We learn an endless technique”, says Wittgenstein (RFM V, §19), “but what is in question here is not some gigantic extension”. An infinite sequence, for example, is not a gigantic extension because it is not an extension, and ‘\(\aleph_0\)’ is not a cardinal number, for “how is this picture connected with the calculus”, given that “its connexion is not that of the picture | | | | with 4” (i.e., given that ‘\(\aleph_0\)’ is not connected to a (finite) extension)? This shows, says Wittgenstein (RFM II, §58), that we ought to avoid the word ‘infinite’ in mathematics wherever it seems to give a meaning to the calculus, rather than acquiring its meaning from the calculus and its use in the calculus. Once we see that the calculus contains nothing infinite, we should not be ‘disappointed’ (RFM II, §60), but simply note (RFM II, §59) that it is not “really necessary… to conjure up the picture of the infinite (of the enormously big)”. A second strong indication that the later Wittgenstein maintains his finitism is his continued and consistent treatment of ‘propositions’ of the type “There are three consecutive 7s in the decimal expansion of \(\pi\)” (hereafter  ‘PIC’).[4]  In the middle period, PIC (and its putative negation, \(\neg\)PIC, namely, “It is not the case that there are three consecutive 7s in the decimal expansion of \(\pi\)”) is not a meaningful mathematical “statement at all” (WVC 81–82: note 1). On Wittgenstein’s intermediate view, PIC—like FLT, GC, and the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra—is not a mathematical proposition because we do not have in hand an applicable decision procedure by which we can decide it in a particular calculus. For this reason, we can only meaningfully state finitistic propositions regarding the expansion of \(\pi\), such as “There exist three consecutive 7s in the first 10,000 places of the expansion of \(\pi\)” (WVC 71; 81–82, note 1). The later Wittgenstein maintains this position in various passages in RFM (Bernays 1959: 11–12). For example, to someone who says that since “the rule of expansion determine[\(s\)] the series completely”, “it must implicitly determine all questions about the structure of the series”, Wittgenstein replies: “Here you are thinking of finite series” (RFM V, §11). If PIC were a mathematical question (or problem)—if it were finitistically restricted—it would be algorithmically decidable, which it is not (RFM V, §21; LFM 31–32, 111, 170; WVC 102–03). As Wittgenstein says at (RFM V, §9): “The question… changes its status, when it becomes decidable”, “[f]or a connexion is made then, which formerly was not there”. And if, moreover, one invokes the Law of the Excluded Middle to establish that PIC is a mathematical proposition—i.e., by saying that one of these “two pictures… must correspond to the fact” (RFM V, §10)—one simply begs the question (RFM V, §12), for if we have doubts about the mathematical status of PIC, we will not be swayed by a person who asserts “PIC \(\vee \neg\)PIC” (RFM VII, §41; V, §13). Wittgenstein’s finitism, constructivism, and conception of mathematical decidability are interestingly connected at (RFM VII, §41, par. 2–5). What harm is done e.g. by saying that God knows all irrational numbers? Or: that they are already there, even though we only know certain of them? Why are these pictures not harmless? For one thing, they hide certain problems.— (MS 124: 139; March 16, 1944) Suppose that people go on and on calculating the expansion of \(\pi\). So God, who knows everything, knows whether they will have reached ‘777’ by the end of the world. But can his omniscience decide whether they would have reached it after the end of the world? It cannot. I want to say: Even God can determine something mathematical only by mathematics. Even for him the mere rule of expansion cannot decide anything that it does not decide for us. We might put it like this: if the rule for the expansion has been given us, a calculation can tell us that there is a ‘2’ at the fifth place. Could God have known this, without the calculation, purely from the rule of expansion? I want to say: No. (MS 124, pp. 175–176; March 23–24, 1944) What Wittgenstein means here is that God’s omniscience might, by calculation, find that ‘777’ occurs at the interval [\(n,n+2\)], but, on the other hand, God might go on calculating forever without ‘777’ ever turning up. Since \(\pi\) is not a completed infinite extension that can be completely surveyed by an omniscient being (i.e., it is not a fact that can be known by an omniscient mind), even God has only the rule, and so God’s omniscience is no advantage in this case (LFM 103–04; cf. Weyl 1921 [1998: 97]). Like us, with our modest minds, an omniscient mind (i.e., God) can only calculate the expansion of \(\pi\) to some \(n\)th decimal place—where our \(n\) is minute and God’s \(n\) is (relatively) enormous—and at no \(n\)th decimal place could any mind rightly conclude that because ‘777’ has not turned up, it, therefore, will never turn up. On one fairly standard interpretation, the later Wittgenstein says that “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” is identical to “provable in calculus \(\Gamma\)” and, therefore, that a mathematical proposition of calculus \(\Gamma\) is a concatenation of signs that is either provable (in principle) or refutable (in principle) in calculus \(\Gamma\) (Goodstein 1972: 279, 282; Anderson 1958: 487; Klenk 1976: 13; Frascolla 1994: 59). On this interpretation, the later Wittgenstein precludes undecidable mathematical propositions, but he allows that some undecided expressions are propositions of a calculus because they are decidable in principle (i.e., in the absence of a known, applicable decision procedure). There is considerable evidence, however, that the later Wittgenstein maintains his intermediate position that an expression is a meaningful mathematical proposition only within a given calculus and iff we knowingly have in hand an applicable and effective decision procedure by means of which we can decide it. For example, though Wittgenstein vacillates between “provable in PM” and “proved in PM” at (RFM App. III, §6, §8), he does so in order to use the former to consider the alleged conclusion of Gödel’s proof (i.e., that there exist true but unprovable mathematical propositions), which he then rebuts with his own identification of “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” with “proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)” (i.e., not with “provable in calculus \(\Gamma\)”) (Wang 1991: 253; Rodych 1999a: 177). This construal is corroborated by numerous passages in which Wittgenstein rejects the received view that a provable but unproved proposition is true, as he does when he asserts that (RFM III, §31, 1939) a proof “makes new connexions”, “[i]t does not establish that they are there” because “they do not exist until it makes them”, and when he says (RFM VII, §10, 1941) that “[a] new proof gives the proposition a place in a new system”. Furthermore, as we have just seen, Wittgenstein rejects PIC as a non-proposition on the grounds that it is not algorithmically decidable, while admitting finitistic versions of PIC because they are algorithmically decidable. Perhaps the most compelling evidence that the later Wittgenstein maintains algorithmic decidability as his criterion for a mathematical proposition lies in the fact that, at (RFM V, §9, 1942), he says in two distinct ways that a mathematical ‘question’ can become decidable and that when this happens, a new connexion is ‘made’ which previously did not exist. Indeed, Wittgenstein cautions us against appearances by saying that “it looks as if a ground for the decision were already there”, when, in fact, “it has yet to be invented”. These passages strongly militate against the claim that the later Wittgenstein grants that proposition \(\phi\) is decidable in calculus \(\Gamma\) iff it is provable or refutable in principle. Moreover, if Wittgenstein held this position, he would claim, contra (RFM V, §9), that a question or proposition does not become decidable since it simply (always) is decidable. If it is provable, and we simply don’t yet know this to be the case, there already is a connection between, say, our axioms and rules and the proposition in question. What Wittgenstein says, however, is that the modalities provable and refutable are shadowy forms of reality—that possibility is not actuality in mathematics (PR §§141, 144, 172; PG 281, 283, 299, 371, 466, 469; LFM 139). Thus, the later Wittgenstein agrees with the intermediate Wittgenstein that the only sense in which an undecided mathematical proposition (RFM VII, §40, 1944) can be decidable is in the sense that we know how to decide it by means of an applicable decision procedure. Largely a product of his anti-foundationalism and his criticism of the extension-intension conflation, Wittgenstein’s later critique of set theory is highly consonant with his intermediate critique (PR §§109, 168; PG 334, 369, 469; LFM 172, 224, 229; and RFM III, §43, 46, 85, 90; VII, §16). Given that mathematics is a “MOTLEY of techniques of proof” (RFM III, §46), it does not require a foundation (RFM VII, §16) and it cannot be given a self-evident foundation (PR §160; WVC 34 & 62; RFM IV, §3). Since set theory was invented to provide mathematics with a foundation, it is, minimally, unnecessary. Even if set theory is unnecessary, it still might constitute a solid foundation for mathematics. In his core criticism of set theory, however, the later Wittgenstein denies this, saying that the diagonal proof does not prove non-denumerability, for “[i]t means nothing to say: ‘Therefore the X numbers are not denumerable’” (RFM II, §10). When the diagonal is construed as a proof of greater and lesser infinite sets it is a “puffed-up proof”, which, as Poincaré argued (1913: 61–62), purports to prove or show more than “its means allow it” (RFM II, §21). If it were said: Consideration of the diagonal procedure shews you that the concept ‘real number’ has much less analogy with the concept ‘cardinal number’ than we, being misled by certain analogies, are inclined to believe, that would have a good and honest sense. But just the opposite happens: one pretends to compare the ‘set’ of real numbers in magnitude with that of cardinal numbers. The difference in kind between the two conceptions is represented, by a skew form of expression, as difference of extension. I believe, and hope, that a future generation will laugh at this hocus pocus. (RFM II, §22) The sickness of a time is cured by an alteration in the mode of life of human beings… (RFM II, §23) The “hocus pocus” of the diagonal proof rests, as always for Wittgenstein, on a conflation of extension and intension, on the failure to properly distinguish sets as rules for generating extensions and (finite) extensions. By way of this confusion “a difference in kind” (i.e., unlimited rule vs. finite extension) “is represented by a skew form of expression”, namely as a difference in the cardinality of two infinite extensions. Not only can the diagonal not prove that one infinite set is greater in cardinality than another infinite set, according to Wittgenstein, nothing could prove this, simply because “infinite sets” are not extensions, and hence not infinite extensions. But instead of interpreting Cantor’s diagonal proof honestly, we take the proof to “show there are numbers bigger than the infinite”, which “sets the whole mind in a whirl, and gives the pleasant feeling of paradox” (LFM 16–17)—a “giddiness attacks us when we think of certain theorems in set theory”—“when we are performing a piece of logical sleight-of-hand” (PI §412; §426; 1945). This giddiness and pleasant feeling of paradox, says Wittgenstein (LFM 16), “may be the chief reason [set theory] was invented”. Though Cantor’s diagonal is not a proof of non-denumerability, when it is expressed in a constructive manner, as Wittgenstein himself expresses it at (RFM II, §1), “it gives sense to the mathematical proposition that the number so-and-so is different from all those of the system” (RFM II, §29). That is, the proof proves non-enumerability: it proves that for any given definite real number concept (e.g., recursive real), one cannot enumerate ‘all’ such numbers because one can always construct a diagonal number, which falls under the same concept and is not in the enumeration. “One might say”, Wittgenstein says, I call number-concept X non-denumerable if it has been stipulated that, whatever numbers falling under this concept you arrange in a series, the diagonal number of this series is also to fall under that concept. (RFM II, §10; cf. II, §§30, 31, 13) One lesson to be learned from this, according to Wittgenstein (RFM II, §33), is that “there are diverse systems of irrational points to be found in the number line”, each of which can be given by a recursive rule, but “no system of irrational numbers”, and “also no super-system, no ‘set of irrational numbers’ of higher-order infinity”. Cantor has shown that we can construct “infinitely many” diverse systems of irrational numbers, but we cannot construct an exhaustive system of all the irrational numbers (RFM II, §29). As Wittgenstein says at (MS 121, 71r; Dec. 27, 1938), three pages after the passage used for (RFM II, §57): If you now call the Cantorian procedure one for producing a new real number, you will now no longer be inclined to speak of a system of all real numbers. (italics added) From Cantor’s proof, however, set theorists erroneously conclude that “the set of irrational numbers” is greater in multiplicity than any enumeration of irrationals (or the set of rationals), when the only conclusion to draw is that there is no such thing as the set of all the irrational numbers. The truly dangerous aspect to ‘propositions’ such as “The real numbers cannot be arranged in a series” and “The set… is not denumerable” is that they make concept formation [i.e., our invention] “look like a fact of nature” (i.e., something we discover) (RFM II §§16, 37). At best, we have a vague idea of the concept of “real number”, but only if we restrict this idea to “recursive real number” and only if we recognize that having the concept does not mean having a set of all recursive real numbers. The principal and most significant change from the middle to later writings on mathematics is Wittgenstein’s (re-)introduction of an extra-mathematical application criterion, which is used to distinguish mere “sign-games” from mathematical language-games. “[I]t is essential to mathematics that its signs are also employed in mufti”, Wittgenstein states, for [i]t is the use outside mathematics, and so the meaning [Bedeutung] of the signs, that makes the sign-game into mathematics. (i.e., a mathematical “language-game”; RFM V, §2, 1942; LFM 140–141, 169–70) As Wittgenstein says at (RFM V, §41, 1943), [c]oncepts which occur in ‘necessary’ propositions must also occur and have a meaning [Bedeutung] in non-necessary ones. (italics added) If two proofs prove the same proposition, says Wittgenstein, this means that “both demonstrate it as a suitable instrument for the same purpose”, which “is an allusion to something outside mathematics” (RFM VII, §10, 1941; italics added). As we have seen, this criterion was present in the Tractatus (6.211), but noticeably absent in the middle period. The reason for this absence is probably that the intermediate Wittgenstein wanted to stress that in mathematics everything is syntax and nothing is meaning. Hence, in his criticisms of Hilbert’s ‘contentual’ mathematics (Hilbert 1925) and Brouwer’s reliance upon intuition to determine the meaningful content of (especially undecidable) mathematical propositions, Wittgenstein couched his finitistic constructivism in strong formalism, emphasizing that a mathematical calculus does not need an extra-mathematical application (PR §109; WVC 105). There seem to be two reasons why the later Wittgenstein reintroduces extra-mathematical application as a necessary condition of a mathematical language-game. First, the later Wittgenstein has an even greater interest in the use of natural and formal languages in diverse “forms of life” (PI §23), which prompts him to emphasize that, in many cases, a mathematical ‘proposition’ functions as if it were an empirical proposition “hardened into a rule” (RFM VI, §23) and that mathematics plays diverse applied roles in many forms of human activity (e.g., science, technology, predictions). Second, the extra-mathematical application criterion relieves the tension between Wittgenstein’s intermediate critique of set theory and his strong formalism according to which “one calculus is as good as another” (PG 334). By demarcating mathematical language-games from non-mathematical sign-games, Wittgenstein can now claim that, “for the time being”, set theory is merely a formal sign-game. These considerations may lead us to say that \(2^{\aleph_0} \gt \aleph_0\). That is to say: we can make the considerations lead us to that. Or: we can say this and give this as our reason. But if we do say it—what are we to do next? In what practice is this proposition anchored? It is for the time being a piece of mathematical architecture which hangs in the air, and looks as if it were, let us say, an architrave, but not supported by anything and supporting nothing. (RFM II, §35) It is not that Wittgenstein’s later criticisms of set theory change, it is, rather, that once we see that set theory has no extra-mathematical application, we will focus on its calculations, proofs, and prose and “subject the interest of the calculations to a test” (RFM II, §62). By means of Wittgenstein’s “immensely important” ‘investigation’ (LFM 103), we will find, Wittgenstein expects, that set theory is uninteresting (e.g., that the non-enumerability of “the reals” is uninteresting and useless) and that our entire interest in it lies in the ‘charm’ of the mistaken prose interpretation of its proofs (LFM 16). More importantly, though there is “a solid core to all [its] glistening concept-formations” (RFM V, §16), once we see it as “as a mistake of ideas”, we will see that propositions such as “\(2^{\aleph_0} \gt \aleph_0\)” are not anchored in an extra-mathematical practice, that “Cantor’s paradise” “is not a paradise”, and we will then leave “of [our] own accord” (LFM 103). It must be emphasized, however, that the later Wittgenstein still maintains that the operations within a mathematical calculus are purely formal, syntactical operations governed by rules of syntax (i.e., the solid core of formalism). It is of course clear that the mathematician, in so far as he really is ‘playing a game’…[is] acting in accordance with certain rules. (RFM V, §1) To say mathematics is a game is supposed to mean: in proving, we need never appeal to the meaning [Bedeutung] of the signs, that is to their extra-mathematical application. (RFM V, §4) Where, during the middle period, Wittgenstein speaks of “arithmetic [as] a kind of geometry” at (PR §109 & §111), the later Wittgenstein similarly speaks of “the geometry of proofs” (RFM I, App. III, §14), the “geometrical cogency” of proofs (RFM III, §43), and a “geometrical application” according to which the “transformation of signs” in accordance with “transformation-rules” (RFM VI, §2, 1941) shows that “when mathematics is divested of all content, it would remain that certain signs can be constructed from others according to certain rules” (RFM III, §38). Hence, the question whether a concatenation of signs is a proposition of a given mathematical calculus (i.e., a calculus with an extra-mathematical application) is still an internal, syntactical question, which we can answer with knowledge of the proofs and decision procedures of the calculus. RFM is perhaps most (in)famous for Wittgenstein’s (RFM App. III) treatment of “true but unprovable” mathematical propositions. Early reviewers said that “[t]he arguments are wild” (Kreisel 1958: 153), that the passages “on Gödel’s theorem… are of poor quality or contain definite errors” (Dummett 1959: 324), and that (RFM App. III) “throws no light on Gödel’s work” (Goodstein 1957: 551). “Wittgenstein seems to want to legislate [[q]uestions about completeness] out of existence”, Anderson said, (1958: 486–87) when, in fact, he certainly cannot dispose of Gödel’s demonstrations “by confusing truth with provability”. Additionally, Bernays, Anderson (1958: 486), and Kreisel (1958: 153–54) claimed that Wittgenstein failed to appreciate “Gödel’s quite explicit premiss of the consistency of the considered formal system” (Bernays 1959: 15), thereby failing to appreciate the conditional nature of Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem. On the reading of these four early expert reviewers, Wittgenstein failed to understand Gödel’s Theorem because he failed to understand the mechanics of Gödel’s proof and he erroneously thought he could refute or undermine Gödel’s proof simply by identifying “true in PM” (i.e., Principia Mathematica) with “proved/provable in PM”. Interestingly, we now have two pieces of evidence (Kreisel 1998: 119; Rodych 2003: 282, 307) that Wittgenstein wrote (RFM App. III) in 1937–38 after reading only the informal, ‘casual’ (MS 126, 126–127; Dec. 13, 1942) introduction of (Gödel 1931) and that, therefore, his use of a self-referential proposition as the “true but unprovable proposition” may be based on Gödel’s introductory, informal statements, namely that “the undecidable proposition [\(R(q);q\)] states… that [\(R(q);q\)] is not provable” (1931: 598) and that “[\(R(q);q\)] says about itself that it is not provable” (1931: 599). Perplexingly, only two of the four famous reviewers even mentioned Wittgenstein’s (RFM VII, §§19, 21–22, 1941)) explicit remarks on ‘Gödel’s’ First Incompleteness Theorem (Bernays 1959: 2; Anderson 1958: 487), which, though flawed, capture the number-theoretic nature of the Gödelian proposition and the functioning of Gödel-numbering, probably because Wittgenstein had by then read or skimmed the body of Gödel’s 1931 paper. The first thing to note, therefore, about (RFM App. III) is that Wittgenstein mistakenly thinks—again, perhaps because Wittgenstein had read only Gödel’s Introduction—(a) that Gödel proves that there are true but unprovable propositions of PM (when, in fact, Gödel syntactically proves that if PM is \(\omega\)-consistent, the Gödelian proposition is undecidable in PM) and (b) that Gödel’s proof uses a self-referential proposition to semantically show that there are true but unprovable propositions of PM. For this reason, Wittgenstein has two main aims in (RFM App. III): (1) to refute or undermine, on its own terms, the alleged Gödel proof of true but unprovable propositions of PM, and (2) to show that, on his own terms, where “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” is identified with “proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)”, the very idea of a true but unprovable proposition of calculus \(\Gamma\) is meaningless. Thus, at (RFM App. III, §8) (hereafter simply ‘§8’), Wittgenstein begins his presentation of what he takes to be Gödel’s proof by having someone say: I have constructed a proposition (I will use ‘P’ to designate it) in Russell’s symbolism, and by means of certain definitions and transformations it can be so interpreted that it says: ‘P is not provable in Russell’s system’. That is, Wittgenstein’s Gödelian constructs a proposition that is semantically self-referential and which specifically says of itself that it is not provable in PM. With this erroneous, self-referential proposition P [used also at (§10), (§11), (§17), (§18)], Wittgenstein presents a proof-sketch very similar to Gödel’s own informal semantic proof ‘sketch’ in the Introduction of his famous paper (1931: 598). Must I not say that this proposition on the one hand is true, and on the other hand is unprovable? For suppose it were false; then it is true that it is provable. And that surely cannot be! And if it is proved, then it is proved that it is not provable. Thus it can only be true, but unprovable. (§8) The reasoning here is a double reductio. Assume (a) that P must either be true or false in Russell’s system, and (b) that P must either be provable or unprovable in Russell’s system. If (a), P must be true, for if we suppose that P is false, since P says of itself that it is unprovable, “it is true that it is provable”, and if it is provable, it must be true (which is a contradiction), and hence, given what P means or says, it is true that P is unprovable (which is a contradiction). Second, if (b), P must be unprovable, for if P “is proved, then it is proved that it is not provable”, which is a contradiction (i.e., P is provable and not provable in PM). It follows that P “can only be true, but unprovable”. To refute or undermine this ‘proof’, Wittgenstein says that if you have proved \(\neg P\), you have proved that P is provable (i.e., since you have proved that it is not the case that P is not provable in Russell’s system), and “you will now presumably give up the interpretation that it is unprovable” (i.e., ‘P is not provable in Russell’s system’), since the contradiction is only proved if we use or retain this self-referential interpretation (§8). On the other hand, Wittgenstein argues (§8), ‘[i]f you assume that the proposition is provable in Russell’s system, that means it is true in the Russell sense, and the interpretation “P is not provable” again has to be given up’, because, once again, it is only the self-referential interpretation that engenders a contradiction. Thus, Wittgenstein’s ‘refutation’ of “Gödel’s proof” consists in showing that no contradiction arises if we do not interpret ‘P’ as ‘P is not provable in Russell’s system’—indeed, without this interpretation, a proof of P does not yield a proof of \(\neg P\) and a proof of \(\neg P\) does not yield a proof of P. In other words, the mistake in the proof is the mistaken assumption that a mathematical proposition ‘P’ “can be so interpreted that it says: ‘P is not provable in Russell’s system’”. As Wittgenstein says at (§11), “[t]hat is what comes of making up such sentences”. This ‘refutation’ of “Gödel’s proof” is perfectly consistent with Wittgenstein’s syntactical conception of mathematics (i.e., wherein mathematical propositions have no meaning and hence cannot have the ‘requisite’ self-referential meaning) and with what he says before and after (§8), where his main aim is to show (2) that, on his own terms, since “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” is identical with “proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)”, the very idea of a true but unprovable proposition of calculus \(\Gamma\) is a contradiction-in-terms. To show (2), Wittgenstein begins by asking (§5), what he takes to be, the central question, namely, “Are there true propositions in Russell’s system, which cannot be proved in his system?”. To address this question, he asks “What is called a true proposition in Russell’s system…?”, which he succinctly answers (§6): “‘p’ is true = p”. Wittgenstein then clarifies this answer by reformulating the second question of (§5) as “Under what circumstances is a proposition asserted in Russell’s game [i.e., system]?”, which he then answers by saying: “the answer is: at the end of one of his proofs, or as a ‘fundamental law’ (Pp.)” (§6). This, in a nutshell, is Wittgenstein’s conception of “mathematical truth”: a true proposition of PM is an axiom or a proved proposition, which means that “true in PM” is identical with, and therefore can be supplanted by, “proved in PM”. Having explicated, to his satisfaction at least, the only real, non-illusory notion of “true in PM”, Wittgenstein answers the (§8) question “Must I not say that this proposition… is true, and… unprovable?” negatively by (re)stating his own (§§5–6) conception of “true in PM” as “proved/provable in PM”: ‘True in Russell’s system’ means, as was said: proved in Russell’s system; and ‘false in Russell’s system’ means: the opposite has been proved in Russell’s system. This answer is given in a slightly different way at (§7) where Wittgenstein asks “may there not be true propositions which are written in this [Russell’s] symbolism, but are not provable in Russell’s system?”, and then answers “‘True propositions’, hence propositions which are true in another system, i.e. can rightly be asserted in another game”. In light of what he says in (§§5, 6, and 8), Wittgenstein’s (§7) point is that if a proposition is ‘written’ in “Russell’s symbolism” and it is true, it must be proved/provable in another system, since that is what “mathematical truth” is. Analogously (§8), “if the proposition is supposed to be false in some other than the Russell sense, then it does not contradict this for it to be proved in Russell’s sense”, for “[w]hat is called ‘losing’ in chess may constitute winning in another game”. This textual evidence certainly suggests, as Anderson almost said, that Wittgenstein rejects a true but unprovable mathematical proposition as a contradiction-in-terms on the grounds that “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” means nothing more (and nothing less) than “proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)”. On this (natural) interpretation of (RFM App. III), the early reviewers’ conclusion that Wittgenstein fails to understand the mechanics of Gödel’s argument seems reasonable. First, Wittgenstein erroneously thinks that Gödel’s proof is essentially semantical and that it uses and requires a self-referential proposition. Second, Wittgenstein says (§14) that “[a] contradiction is unusable” for “a prediction” that “that such-and-such construction is impossible” (i.e., that P is unprovable in PM), which, superficially at least, seems to indicate that Wittgenstein fails to appreciate the “consistency assumption” of Gödel’s proof (Kreisel, Bernays, Anderson). If, in fact, Wittgenstein did not read and/or failed to understand Gödel’s proof through at least 1941, how would he have responded if and when he understood it as (at least) a proof of the undecidability of P in PM on the assumption of PM’s consistency? Given his syntactical conception of mathematics, even with the extra-mathematical application criterion, he would simply say that P, qua expression syntactically independent of PM, is not a proposition of PM, and if it is syntactically independent of all existent mathematical language-games, it is not a mathematical proposition. Moreover, there seem to be no compelling non-semantical reasons—either intra-systemic or extra-mathematical—for Wittgenstein to accommodate P by including it in PM or by adopting a non-syntactical conception of mathematical truth (such as Tarski-truth (Steiner 2000)). Indeed, Wittgenstein questions the intra-systemic and extra-mathematical usability of P in various discussions of Gödel in the Nachlass and, at (§19), he emphatically says that one cannot “make the truth of the assertion [‘P’ or ‘Therefore P’] plausible to me, since you can make no use of it except to do these bits of legerdemain”. After the initial, scathing reviews of RFM, very little attention was paid to Wittgenstein’s (RFM App. III and RFM VII, §§21–22) discussions of Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem (Klenk 1976: 13) until Shanker’s sympathetic (1988b). In the last 22 years, however, commentators and critics have offered various interpretations of Wittgenstein’s remarks on Gödel, some being largely sympathetic (Floyd 1995, 2001) and others offering a more mixed appraisal (Rodych 1999a, 2002, 2003; Steiner 2001; Priest 2004; Berto 2009a). Recently, and perhaps most interestingly, Floyd & Putnam (2000) and Steiner (2001) have evoked new and interesting discussions of Wittgenstein’s ruminations on undecidability, mathematical truth, and Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem (Rodych 2003, 2006; Bays 2004; Sayward 2005; and Floyd & Putnam 2006).