 In a logic seminar he gave at the University of Warsaw between 1927 and 1929, Tarski proved several results that made reference to notions that later would be called “semantical”, in particular results about the notions of definability and of truth in a structure (see Vaught 1974 and 1986). Vaught informs us that Tarski found certain difficulties when trying to give a mathematically satisfactory form to the results presented in the seminar, and that this led him to look for a precise theory of the semantical notions (cf. Vaught 1974, pp. 160ff.  and 1986, pp. 870ff.). Such a theory did not exist at the time. In particular, there were no definitions of these notions in terms of concepts accepted in the foundational systems designed for the reconstruction of classical mathematics (for example, Russell and Whitehead’s theory of types or Zermelo’s set theory). Because of this, the existing results in which these notions appeared could not be reconstructed in the accepted foundational systems. And there was no rigorous axiomatic theory of the semantical notions in which these were taken as primitive, either. In spite of this, the results about semantical notions were important and even moderately abundant by 1930. Among these Tarski himself would mention Gödel’s completeness theorem and several versions of the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem (cf. Tarski 1983b, pp. 240–1, sp. p. 240 n.1, and p. 241 n. 2). All these results use the notion of truth in a structure, or functionally equivalent notions. And Tarski says that Tarski’s aim in a series of works on semantical notions was precisely to propose mathematically acceptable definitions of those notions, and in particular acceptable in some one of the chief foundational systems (the system chosen by Tarski will change with time; see below). With appropriate definitions of those notions, the theorems about them would be susceptible of being reformulated making use of the defined notions, and the uneasiness described by Tarski in the text just quoted would be alleviated. The alternative of taking the semantical notions as primitive is also considered by Tarski in several places, but he clearly prefers to avoid it if possible. The reason is that in the axiomatic alternative there is no negligible risk that there remain ways of generating the semantical antinomies for the semantical primitives of the system (cf. Tarski 1983b, p. 255). With the definitional procedure, however, the consistency of the definition would depend exclusively on the consistency of the theory in which it is formulated, and this will be a theory we have reasons to think is consistent. The first work containing a mathematical definition of one of the semantical notions is Tarski (1931) (English version, Tarski 1983d), where Tarski examines a language L in which it is possible to formalize the arithmetic of the real numbers, and gives a recursive definition of the notion “set of real numbers definable in L” (cf. Def. 9 in Tarski 1983d, p. 128). The definition depends on others that are a bit cumbersome; today we would define a similar notion in a simpler way with the help of the definition of truth that Tarski himself would publish two years later. But the essence of the Tarskian definition of truth is already here. In the 1931 paper we find also, as was to be expected, the Tarskian concern with matters of precision and foundational rigor, and a revealing statement about the attitude of mathematicians toward the notion of definability, that could be extended to other semantical notions: In his classic monograph on the concept of truth “The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages” (Polish original version, Tarski 1933; German translation with an added postscript, Tarski 1935; English version of the German text, Tarski 1983b), Tarski will present a method for constructing definitions of truth for classical quantificational formal languages. When one succeeds in applying this method to a particular formal language, the end result will be the construction of a predicate in a metalanguage for that language whose essential properties will be that it will be constructed out of non-suspicious mathematical vocabulary and that it will be intuitively satisfied precisely by the intuitively true sentences of the object language. At the same time, Tarski shows how, in terms of the defined notion of truth, one can give intuitively adequate definitions of the semantical notions of definability and denotation, and he indicates how it is possible to define the notion of truth in a structure in a way analogous to the one used to define  truth.[1]  That allows him to conclude that the acceptability and rigor of the “recent methodological studies” (of Löwenheim, Skolem, Gödel and Tarski himself, among others), have been vindicated (cf. Tarski 1983b, p. 266). Languages, both object languages and metalanguages, are in the monograph not just interpreted grammars; a language also includes a deductive system. A Tarskian metalanguage always includes its object language as a part, both its grammar (perhaps under some translation) and its deductive system. And besides, it will always contain a few more things if these things are not already in the object language. Specifically, it will always contain a sub-language and sub-theory that can be used to say a great deal of things about the syntax of the object language; and it will always contain all the mathematics (both concepts and methods of proof) that “may be taken from any sufficiently developed system of mathematical logic” (Tarski 1983b, p. 211). Tarski doesn’t give a general formulation of his method. Such a general formulation would not be too illuminating. Instead he helpfully chooses to illustrate his method as it would work for a few languages.  The most basic example he uses, to which about half of his monograph is devoted, is what he calls “the language of the calculus of classes” (LCC). Here is a quick description in more current notation (Tarski uses Łukasiewicz’s Polish notation): Besides all this, Tarski gives a deductive system for LCC, as required of every language. Tarski’s most basic idea about how to construct a truth predicate, a predicate which will be intuitively satisfied exactly by the intuitively true sentences of LCC, is that such a predicate should verify what he calls “convention T”. This convention imposes a condition on defined truth predicates ((a) in the example immediately below) that Tarski often talks about as grasping the intuitions behind the “classical Aristotelian conception of truth” (cf. Tarski 1983b, p.  155; 1944, pp. 342–3). Convention T is here spelled out for the case of LCC: Convention T. A formally correct definition of the symbol “Tr”, formulated in the metalanguage, will be called an adequate definition of truth if the deductive system of the metatheory proves the following: That a definition is “formally correct” means, roughly, that it will be constructed out of non-suspicious vocabulary following non-controversial rules for defining new expressions. But why should one think that a predicate verifying convention T should be, besides, coextensional with the intuitive predicate of truth for LCC?  The reason can be given by an intuitive argument relating both predicates, such as the following (cf. Tarski 1944, pp. 353–4): (⇒) Suppose that “p” is a sentence of LCC such that Tr(“p”). By assumption, “Tr(”p“) if and only if p” is provable in the metalanguage. So Tr(“p”) if and only if p (the metalanguage must only prove truths). So p. So “p” is true. (⇐) Suppose that “p” is true. Then p. And then, as before, Tr(“p”). Tarski defines truth in terms of the notion of the satisfaction of a formula of LCC by an infinite sequence of assignments (of appropriate objects: subclasses of the universe of individuals in the case of LCC). He gives first a recursive definition and immediately indicates how to transform it into a normal or explicit definition. The recursive definition is this: an infinite sequence of classes f satisfies formula F if and only if f and F are such that The normal definition is this: An infinite sequence of subclasses f satisfies a formula F if and only if f and F stand in every relation R among sequences and formulae such that, for any g and G, g and G stand in R if and only if g is an infinite sequence of subclasses, F is a formula and either Tarski then defines the truth predicate as follows: Given the way the definition has been constructed, it is intuitively clear that the metalanguage will prove all biconditionals of the convention T for LCC. Tarski does not prove this cumbersome fact in a metametalanguage, and he helpfully contents himself with showing how a few of the biconditionals would be established in the metalanguage. The usual reasonings leading to the semantical antinomies cannot be reproduced for the Tarskian defined semantical concepts. In particular, the antinomy of the liar cannot be reproduced using the defined predicate Tr. Consider the version of the antinomy offered by Tarski (due to Łukasiewicz). Abbreviate the expression “the first underlined sentence of this entry” with the letter “c”. Now consider the sentence: Given what “c” abbreviates, we get And the following is intuitively true: From (a) and (b) follows the contradiction The reason why this cannot be reproduced for Tr is that this predicate is always a predicate of a language (the metalanguage) different from the language of the sentences to which it applies (the object language). It is not possible to form a sentence of the language for which one defines Tr that says of itself that it is (not) Tr, since Tr is not a predicate of that language. On the other hand, it is certainly possible in some cases to form a sentence S of the metalanguage that says of itself that it is not Tr, but since S is a sentence of the metalanguage it is simply true and (presumably) not paradoxical, since there is no reason why a biconditional like (b) should hold for it; biconditionals of this kind hold only for sentences of the language for which Tr has been defined, not for sentences of the metalanguage. LCC has the property of being what Tarski calls a “language of finite order”. The idea of order is familiar. Variables for individuals (non-existent in LCC) are of order 1. Variables for classes of individuals (all the variables of LCC) are of order 2. Variables for classes of classes of individuals are of order 3, and so on. The order of a language of this series is the greatest positive integer n with variables of order n. (Thus, although LCC looks grammatically just like a first-order language, semantically it can be seen as a fragment of what under present conventions would be called a second-order language.) But there are also languages of infinite order. In these the order of the available variables is not bounded above. Tarski gives an example, which he calls “the language of the general theory of classes” (LGTC). Here again is a quick description in more current notation: Besides all this, Tarski gives a deductive system for LGTC, as required of every language. Suffice it to say that it is a version of a typical simple theory of finite types, with axioms and rules for the connectives and quantifiers, axioms of comprehension and extensionality for all orders, and an axiom of infinity. Tarski observes that LGTC suffices, with the help of some tricks, to develop all the mathematics that can be developed in the simple theory of finite types, even though it has formally fewer types of variables. In the 1933 original Polish version of his monograph Tarski says that his method for constructing truth predicates cannot be applied to the construction of a truth predicate for LGTC. The problem is that in 1933 Tarski adopts as the mathematical apparatus of his metalanguages the simple theory of finite types, or equivalently, LGTC.  In this language, supplemented (and even unsupplemented) by a theory of syntax for LCC, Tarski has everything he needs to give his definition of satisfaction for LCC. In particular, the relation of satisfaction for LCC is a relation that can be found in the hierarchy of finite types. (Full set theory is not needed.) And the form in which Tarski defines it quantifies only over sequences of classes and over relations among sequences of classes and formulae (as we may check above), and these are objects quantifiable over in finite type theory. But the construction of a Tarskian truth predicate for LGTC could not be carried out in finite type theory. The relation of satisfaction for LGTC is intuitively a relation among formulae and sequences of: sequences of individuals, sequences of classes of individuals, sequences of classes of classes of individuals, etc. And this relation is not a relation in the hierarchy of finite types. Much less can one quantify in finite type theory over the objects necessary to apply the Tarskian method. One cannot quantify over sequences of: sequences of individuals, sequences of classes of individuals, sequences of classes of classes of individuals, etc.; and one cannot quantify over relations among formulae and sequences of: sequences of individuals, sequences of classes of individuals, sequences of classes of classes of individuals, etc. It is this situation that leads Tarski to wonder There is a problem even in formulating the question precisely, for, as Tarski notes, But The negative answer is provided by a version of Tarski’s theorem of the indefinability of truth. The weakest Tarskian metalanguage for LGTC will consist in expanding LGTC by means of concepts and a theory of the syntax of LGTC. But the mathematical part of the metalanguage will be the same, for that’s the “sufficiently developed system of mathematical logic” of which Tarski spoke. Further, the metalanguage will obviously contain its object language as part, both its grammar (under no translation) and its deductive system, because LGTC will appear both in the object language and in the metalanguage (cf. Tarski 1983b, p. 247). In a word, the metalanguage, which we may call “LGTC+”, is LGTC plus a theory of the syntax of LGTC. The question that Tarski poses is, then, whether there is a predicate constructible in LGTC+ which verifies the convention T for sentences of LGTC. Tarski solves it negatively by proving the following theorem: Theorem I. (a) In whatever way the symbol “Tr”, denoting a class of expressions, is defined in LGTC+, it will be possible to derive from it the negation of one of the sentences which were described in the condition (a) of the convention T; (b) assuming that the class of all provable sentences of the metatheory is consistent, it is impossible to construct an adequate definition of truth in the sense of convention T on the basis of LGTC+ (cf. Tarski 1983b, p. 247). Part (b) of Theorem I is a trivial consequence of part (a), since it is the mark of a consistent system that it doesn’t contain a sentence and its negation. The proof of part (a) is an application of Gödel’s technique of diagonalization. The following are the basic steps described using the anachronistic recourse to a more familiar case and to a modern, streamlined notation. View LGTC as if it were a standard language L for first-order arithmetic. Suppose we extend it with a theory for talking about the syntax of L (this would not be a Tarskian metalanguage, since it would not include a “sufficiently developed system of mathematical logic”, but all this is just for purposes of illustration). Call the extension L+. Then L+ can be “interpreted” in L using Gödelian techniques, by which Tarski means, roughly, that one can translate L+ into L arithmetizing it in such a way that the translations of theorems of L+ will be theorems of L. Now suppose that φ(n) is the nth expression of L (and that this function is definable in L+), that d(x) is a diagonal function for expressions of L (which is definable in L+; here I have in mind one involving substitution of numerals for free variables), and let n be the numeral of n. Then for every predicate E(x) of expressions of L defined in L+ one can prove in L+ a general sentence of the form ∀n[¬E(d(φ(n)))↔ψ(n)], where ψ(n) is a formula with one free variable entirely constructed in L (through the arithmetization of the L+ predicate “¬E(d(φ(n)))”). Then one can also prove the sentence ¬E(d(φ(k)))↔ψ(k), where k is the Gödel number of ψ(n). d(φ(k)) is the sentence ψ(k), so ψ(k) is a “fixed point” of the predicate ¬E(x): it “says of itself” that it has the property expressed by ¬E(x). The sentence ¬E(d(φ(k)))↔ψ(k) is already equivalent to the sentence ¬[E(d(φ(k)))↔ψ(k)], and part (a) of Theorem I is proved. In the postscript to the 1935 German translation of the monograph on truth, Tarski abandons the 1933 requirement that the apparatus of the metatheory be formalizable in finite type theory, and accepts the use of a more powerful theory of transfinite types, where the transfinite objects are classes of the objects of lower types, or the use of set theory. Tarski notes that the relation of satisfaction and a truth predicate for LGTC (and LGTC+) are definable in these more powerful metatheories (cf. Tarski 1983b, pp. 271–2). But he also says that the proof of the indefinability theorem can be adapted to show that, in general, one cannot define a truth predicate “if the order of the metalanguage is at most equal to that of the language itself” (Tarski 1983b, p. 273).