 The scientific revolution in the seventeenth century brought with it  new forms of analysis. The newest of these emerged through the  development of more sophisticated mathematical techniques, but even  these still had their roots in earlier conceptions of analysis. By  the end of the early modern period, decompositional analysis had  become dominant (as outlined in what follows), but this, too, took  different forms, and the relationships between the various  conceptions of analysis were often far from clear. In common with the Renaissance, the early modern period was marked by a great concern with methodology. This might seem unsurprising in  such a revolutionary period, when new techniques for understanding  the world were being developed and that understanding itself was  being transformed. But what characterizes many of the treatises and  remarks on methodology that appeared in the seventeenth century is  their appeal, frequently self-conscious, to ancient methods (despite, or perhaps—for diplomatic reasons—because of, the  critique of the content of traditional thought), although  new wine was generally poured into the old bottles. The model of  geometrical analysis was a particular inspiration here, albeit  filtered through the Aristotelian tradition, which had assimilated  the regressive process of going from theorems to axioms with that of  moving from effects to causes (see the supplementary section on   Aristotle).  Analysis came to be seen as a method of discovery, working back from  what is ordinarily known to the underlying reasons (demonstrating  ‘the fact’), and synthesis as a method of proof, working  forwards again from what is discovered to what needed explanation  (demonstrating ‘the reason why’). Analysis and synthesis  were thus taken as complementary, although there remained  disagreement over their respective merits. There is a manuscript by Galileo, dating from around 1589, an  appropriated commentary on Aristotle's Posterior  Analytics, which shows his concern with methodology, and  regressive analysis, in particular (see Wallace 1992a and 1992b).  Hobbes wrote a chapter on method in the first part of De  Corpore, published in 1655, which offers his own interpretation  of the method of analysis and synthesis, where decompositional forms  of analysis are articulated alongside regressive forms   [Quotations].  But perhaps the most influential account of methodology, from the  middle of the seventeenth century until well into the nineteenth  century, was the fourth part of the Port-Royal Logic, the  first edition of which appeared in 1662 and the final revised edition in 1683. Chapter 2 (which was the first chapter in the first edition) opens as follows: Hence there are two kinds of method, one for discovering the truth,  which is known as analysis, or the method of  resolution, and which can also be called the method of  discovery. The other is for making the truth understood by  others once it is found. This is known as synthesis, or the  method of composition, and can also be called the method of instruction.   [Fuller Quotations] That a number of different methods might be assimilated here is not  noted, although the text does go on to distinguish four main types of ‘issues concerning things’: seeking causes by their  effects, seeking effects by their causes, finding the whole from the  parts, and looking for another part from the whole and a given part  (ibid., 234). While the first two involve regressive  analysis and synthesis, the third and fourth involve decompositional  analysis and synthesis. As the authors of the Logic make clear, this particular part of their text derives from Descartes's Rules for the  Direction of the Mind, written around 1627, but only published  posthumously in 1684. The specification of the four types was most  likely offered in elaborating Descartes's Rule Thirteen, which  states: “If we perfectly understand a problem we must abstract  it from every superfluous conception, reduce it to its simplest terms and, by means of an enumeration, divide it up into the smallest  possible parts.” (PW, I, 51. Cf. the editorial  comments in PW, I, 54, 77.) The decompositional conception  of analysis is explicit here, and if we follow this up into the later Discourse on Method, published in 1637, the focus has  clearly shifted from the regressive to the decompositional conception of analysis. All the rules offered in the earlier work have now been  reduced to just four. This is how Descartes reports the rules he says he adopted in his scientific and philosophical work: The second, to divide each of the difficulties I examined into as  many parts as possible and as may be required in order to resolve  them better. The third, to direct my thoughts in an orderly manner, by beginning  with the simplest and most easily known objects in the order to  ascend little by little, step by step, to knowledge of the most  complex, and by supposing some order even among objects that have no  natural order of precedence. And the last, throughout to make enumerations so complete, and  reviews so comprehensive, that I could be sure of leaving nothing  out. (PW, I, 120.) The first two are rules of analysis and the second two rules of  synthesis. But although the analysis/synthesis structure remains,  what is involved here is decomposition/composition rather than  regression/progression. Nevertheless, Descartes insisted that it was  geometry that influenced him here: “Those long chains composed  of very simple and easy reasonings, which geometers customarily use  to arrive at their most difficult demonstrations, had given me  occasion to suppose that all the things which can fall under human  knowledge are interconnected in the same way.” (Ibid.   [Further Quotations]) Descartes's geometry did indeed involve the breaking down of  complex problems into simpler ones. More significant, however, was  his use of algebra in developing ‘analytic’ geometry as  it came to be called, which allowed geometrical problems to be  transformed into arithmetical ones and more easily solved. In  representing the ‘unknown’ to be found by  ‘x’, we can see the central role played in  analysis by the idea of taking something as ‘given’ and  working back from that, which made it seem appropriate to regard  algebra as an ‘art of analysis’, alluding to the  regressive conception of the ancients. Illustrated in analytic  geometry in its developed form, then, we can see all three of the  conceptions of analysis outlined in   Section 1.1  above, despite Descartes's own emphasis on the decompositional  conception. For further discussion of this, see the supplementary  section on   Descartes and Analytic Geometry. Descartes's emphasis on decompositional analysis was not  without precedents, however. Not only was it already involved in  ancient Greek geometry, but it was also implicit in Plato's  method of collection and division. We might explain the shift from  regressive to decompositional (conceptual) analysis, as well as the  connection between the two, in the following way. Consider a simple  example, as represented in the diagram below,  ‘collecting’ all animals and ‘dividing’ them  into rational and non-rational, in order to define  human beings as rational animals. On this model, in seeking to define anything, we work back up the  appropriate classificatory hierarchy to find the higher (i.e., more  basic or more general) ‘Forms’, by means of which we can  lay down the definition. Although Plato did not himself use the term  ‘analysis’—the word for ‘division’ was  ‘dihairesis’—the finding of the  appropriate ‘Forms’ is essentially analysis. As an  elaboration of the Socratic search for definitions, we clearly have  in this the origins of conceptual analysis. There is little  disagreement that ‘Human beings are rational animals’ is  the kind of definition we are seeking, defining one concept, the  concept human being, in terms of other concepts, the  concepts rational and animal. But the construals  that have been offered of this have been more problematic.  Understanding a classificatory hierarchy extensionally, that is, in terms of the classes of things denoted, the classes higher up  are clearly the larger, ‘containing’ the classes lower  down as subclasses (e.g., the class of animals includes the class of  human beings as one of its subclasses). Intensionally,  however, the relationship of ‘containment’ has been seen  as holding in the opposite direction. If someone understands the  concept human being, at least in the strong sense of knowing its definition, then they must understand the concepts  animal and rational; and it has often then seemed  natural to talk of the concept human being as  ‘containing’ the concepts rational and  animal. Working back up the hierarchy in  ‘analysis’ (in the regressive sense) could then come to  be identified with ‘unpacking’ or  ‘decomposing’ a concept into its  ‘constituent’ concepts (‘analysis’ in the  decompositional sense). Of course, talking of  ‘decomposing’ a concept into its  ‘constituents’ is, strictly speaking, only a metaphor (as Quine was famously to remark in §1 of ‘Two Dogmas of  Empiricism’), but in the early modern period, this began to be  taken more literally. For further discussion, see the supplementary document on which contains sections on Descartes and Analytic Geometry, British  Empiricism, Leibniz, and Kant. For further reading, see the