 All Aristotle’s logic revolves around one notion: the deduction (sullogismos). A thorough explanation of what a deduction is, and what they are composed of, will necessarily lead us through the whole of his theory. What, then, is a deduction? Aristotle says: Each of the “things supposed” is a premise (protasis) of the argument, and what “results of necessity” is the conclusion (sumperasma). The core of this definition is the notion of “resulting of necessity” (ex anankês sumbainein). This corresponds to a modern notion of logical consequence: \(X\) results of necessity from \(Y\) and \(Z\) if it would be impossible for \(X\) to be false when \(Y\) and \(Z\) are true. We could therefore take this to be a general definition of “valid argument”. Deductions are one of two species of argument recognized by Aristotle. The other species is induction (epagôgê). He has far less to say about this than deduction, doing little more than characterize it as “argument from the particular to the universal”. However, induction (or something very much like it) plays a crucial role in the theory of scientific knowledge in the Posterior Analytics: it is induction, or at any rate a cognitive process that moves from particulars to their generalizations, that is the basis of knowledge of the indemonstrable first principles of sciences. Despite its wide generality, Aristotle’s definition of deduction is not a precise match for a modern definition of validity. Some of the differences may have important consequences: Of these three possible restrictions, the most interesting would be the third. This could be (and has been) interpreted as committing Aristotle to something like a  relevance logic.  In fact, there are passages that appear to confirm this. However, this is too complex a matter to discuss here. However the definition is interpreted, it is clear that Aristotle does not mean to restrict it only to a subset of the valid arguments. This is why I have translated sullogismos with ‘deduction’ rather than its English cognate. In modern usage, ‘syllogism’ means an argument of a very specific form. Moreover, modern usage distinguishes between valid syllogisms (the conclusions of which follow from their premises) and invalid syllogisms (the conclusions of which do not follow from their premises). The second of these is inconsistent with Aristotle’s use: since he defines a sullogismos as an argument in which the conclusion results of necessity from the premises, “invalid sullogismos” is a contradiction in terms. The first is also at least highly misleading, since Aristotle does not appear to think that the sullogismoi are simply an interesting subset of the valid arguments. Moreover (see below), Aristotle expends great efforts to argue that every valid argument, in a broad sense, can be “reduced” to an argument, or series of arguments, in something like one of the forms traditionally called a syllogism. If we translate sullogismos as “syllogism, ”, this becomes the trivial claim “Every syllogism is a syllogism”,