 The publication of Thomas S. Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), ironically, was among the historical developments that contributed to a loss of confidence in science. Kuhn’s work, which turned “paradigm” into a household word, was widely regarded as assimilating revolutions in science to revolutions in politics, where one theory succeeds another only upon the death of its adherents. It was interpreted as having destroyed the myth that philosophers possess some special kind of wisdom or insight in relation to the nature of science or the thought processes of scientists with respect to their rationality, almost as though every opinion were on a par with every other. A close reading of Kuhn’s work shows that these were not his own conclusions, but they were enormously influential. And among the public at large and many social scientists, the tendency to no longer hold science in high esteem or to be affected by its findings has induced political ramifications that are inimical to the general good. When our beliefs are not well founded, actions we base upon them are unlikely to succeed, often with unforeseen effects that are harmful. Rational actions ought to be based upon rational beliefs, where science has proven to be the most reliable method for acquiring knowledge about ourselves and the world around us. This study supports the conclusion that Hempel’s conception of scientific explanations as involving the subsumption of singular events by means of covering laws was well-founded, even though his commitment to an extensional methodology inhibited him from embracing a more adequate account of natural laws. The symmetry thesis turns out to require qualification, not only with respect to predictions for events that occur only with low probability, but also for retrodictions derived by modus tollens. The link that perhaps most accurately embodies the relationship between Hempel’s work on explanation and decision-and-inference occurs in the form of “the principal principle”, which David Lewis advanced to formalize the recognition that personal probabilities as degrees of belief in the occurrence of specific events under specific conditions should have the same values as corresponding objective probabilities, when they are known (Lewis 1980). The values of propensities as properties of laws, no doubt, should be given precedence over the values of frequencies, insofar as laws, unlike frequencies, cannot be violated and cannot be changed and provide a more reliable guide. A recent trend presumes that the philosophy of science has been misconceived and requires “a naturalistic turn” as a kind of science of science more akin to history or to sociology than to philosophy. In studies published in the twilight of his career, Hempel demonstrated that, without standards to separate science from pseudo-science, it would be impossible to distinguish frauds, charlatans, and quacks from the real thing (Hempel 1979, 1983). Without knowing “the standards of science”, we would not know which of those who call themselves “scientists” are scientists and which methods are “scientific”, where the place of explanation remains central within the context of inference to the best explanation (Fetzer 2002). The philosophy of science, therefore, cannot be displaced by history or by sociology. Not least among the important lessons of Hempel’s enduring legacy is the realization that the standards of science cannot be derived from mere descriptions of its practice alone but require rational justification in the form of explications satisfying the highest standards of philosophical rigor.