 However surprising it may initially seem, contemporary developments in the philosophy of science can only be properly appreciated in relation to the historical background of logical positivism. Hempel himself attained a certain degree of prominence as a critic of this movement. Language, Truth and Logic (1936; 2nd edition, 1946), authored by A.J. Ayer, offers a lucid exposition of the movement, which was—with certain variations—based upon the analytic/synthetic distinction, the observational/theoretical distinction, and the verifiability criterion of meaningfulness. A fundamental desideratum motivating its members was to establish standards for separating genuine questions for which answers might be found from pseudo questions for which no answers could be found. According to the first principle, sentences are analytic relative to a language framework \(\mathbf{L}\) when their truth follows from its grammar and vocabulary alone. In English, “Bachelors are unmarried” cannot be false, since “bachelor \(=_{\df}\) unmarried, adult male”. Sentences of this kind make no claims about the world, but instead reflect features of the linguistic framework as syntactical or semantic truths in \(\mathbf{L}\). And sentences are synthetic when they make claims about the world. Their truth in \(\mathbf{L}\) does not follow from its grammar and vocabulary alone but hinges upon properties of the world and its history. According to logical positivism, all such claims about the world have to be evaluated on the basis of experience, which means the kind of knowledge they display is a posteriori. But kinds of knowledge whose truth can be established independently of experience are a priori. Logical positivism affirmed that, given a language \(\mathbf{L}\), all a priori knowledge is analytic and all synthetic knowledge is a posteriori, thus denying the existence of knowledge that is both synthetic and a priori. Indeed, the denial of the existence of synthetic a priori knowledge is commonly assumed to define the position known as “Empiricism”, while the affirmation of its existence defines “Rationalism”. Figure 1 thus reflects the intersection of kinds of sentences and kinds of knowledge on the Empiricist approach: Figure 1. The Empiricist Position The category for sentences that are analytic and yet represent a posteriori knowledge deserves discussion. The empirical study of the use of language within language-using communities by field linguists involves establishing the grammar and the vocabulary employed within each such community. Their empirical research yields theories of the languages, \(\mathbf{L}\), used in those communities and affords a basis for distinguishing between which sentences are analytic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\) and which are synthetic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\). The kind of knowledge they acquire about specific sentences based on empirical procedures thus assumes the form, “Sentence \(S\) is analytic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\)”, when that is true of sentence \(S\), which is a posteriori. One of Hempel’s early influential articles was a defense of logicism, according to which mathematics—with the notable exception of geometry, which he addressed separately—can be reduced to logic (for Hempel, including set theory) as its foundation (Hempel 1945c). Mathematics thus becomes an exemplar of analytic a priori knowledge. Two subtheses should be distinguished: (i) that all mathematical concepts can be defined by means of basic logical concepts; and (ii) that all mathematical theorems can be deduced from basic logical truths. In order to distinguish logicism from formalism, however, the former maintains that there is one system of logic that is fundamental to all inquiries, where all mathematical terms are reducible to logical terms, and all mathematical axioms are derivable from logical ones, which formalism denies (Rech 2004). The tenability of logicism been disputed on multiple grounds, the most prominent of which has been that the notion of membership fundamental to the theory of sets is not a logical notion but rather a symbol that must be added to first-order logic to formalize what is properly understood as a non-logical theory. Nor would philosophers today accept the conception of the axioms of set theory as logical axioms, since there exist alternatives. So even if mathematics were reducible to set theory, these considerations undermine Hempel’s claim that mathematics is thereby reducible to logic (cf. Benacerraf 1981 and Linsky & Zalta 2006, which provides an extensive bibliography). Hempel’s views about geometry, in retrospect, thus appear to have been the better founded. The analytic/synthetic distinction and the observational/theoretical distinction were tied together by the verifiability criterion of meaningfulness, according to which, in relation to a given language, \(\mathbf{L}\), a sentence \(S\) is meaningful if and only if it is either analytic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\) or synthetic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\) as an observation sentence or a sentence whose truth follows from a finite set of observation sentences. By this standard, sentences that are non-analytic but also non-verifiable, including various theological or metaphysical assertions concerning God or The Absolute, qualify as cognitively meaningless. This was viewed as a desirable result. But, as Hempel would demonstrate, its scope was far too sweeping, since it also rendered meaningless the distinctively scientific assertions made by laws and theories. From an historical perspective, logical positivism represents a linguistic version of the empiricist epistemology of David Hume (1711–76). It refines his crucial distinctions of “relations between ideas” and “matters of fact” by redefining them relative to a language \(\mathbf{L}\) as sentences that are analytic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\) and synthetic-in-\(\mathbf{L}\), respectively. His condition that significant ideas are those which can be traced back to impressions in experience that gave rise to them now became the claim that synthetic sentences have to be justified by derivability from finite classes of observation sentences. Hume applied this criterion to exclude the idea of necessary connections, which are not observable, from significant causal claims, which were thereby reduced to relations of regular association, spatial contiguity, and temporal succession. And logical positivism followed Hume’s lead. Empiricism historically stands in opposition to Rationalism, which is represented most prominently by Immanuel Kant, who argued that the mind, in processing experiences, imposes certain properties on whatever we experience, including what he called Forms of Intuition and Categories of Understanding. The Forms of Intuition impose Euclidean spatial relations and Newtonian temporal relations; the Categories of Understanding require objects to be interpreted as substances and causes as inherently deterministic. Several developments in the history of science, such as the emergence of the theory of relativity and of quantum mechanics, undermine Kant’s position by introducing the role of frames of reference and of probabilistic causation. Newer versions are associated with Noam Chomsky and with Jerry Fodor, who have championed the ideas of an innate syntax and innate semantics, respectively (Chomsky 1957; Fodor 1975; Chomsky 1986) Indeed, according to the computational theory of the mind, human minds, like computing machines, are special kinds of formal systems. Since deviations from formal systems of language in practice can be considerable, Chomsky introduced a distinction between competence and performance, where the former models the formal system and various explanations are advanced for deviations from that model in practice, similar to differences between the fall of bodies in a vacuum and in air, which raises questions about testability that parallel those for scientific theories, in general. If languages are not best understood as formal systems, however, or if syntax and semantics are not innate, then Chomsky and Fodor’s views are as vulnerable as those of Kant. If syntax is an emergent property of semantic complexity, for example, then grammar is not innate; and if mentality has and continues to evolve, Chomsky and Fodor are wrong (Schoenemann 1999; Fetzer 2005). In his study of formal systems for geometry (Hempel 1945b), Hempel discusses the existence of alternatives based upon different axioms, which differentiate Euclidean geometry from its non-Euclidean rivals. According to Euclid, for example, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle must equal 180° and, in relation to a point separate from a given line, one and only one parallel line passes through it. The alternatives advanced by Lobachevsky (hyperbolic) and by Riemann (elliptical), however, which represent the surface of a sphere and of a saddle, respectively, violate both of those conditions, albeit in different ways. Hempel emphasized that all three, as formal systems, are on a par, where the most appropriate choice to describe the geometry of space depends on the outcome of empirical studies. As it happened, Einstein would adopt a generalized form of Riemannian geometry in his general theory of relativity. Hempel accordingly drew a distinction of fundamental importance between pure and applied mathematics, which he emphasized by using a quotation from Einstein, who had observed, “As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality” (1921). The existence of alternative and incompatible formal systems, moreover, appears to affect Hempel’s defense of logicism from another direction. If mathematics is supposed to be reducible to logic and logic is supposed to be consistent, then how can alternative geometries be consistently reducible to logic? No one would dispute that they exist as distinct formal systems with their own axioms and primitives, but if these geometries are jointly reducible to logic only if logic is inconsistent, their existence suggests that, perhaps, as formalism claims, it is not the case there is one system of logic that is fundamental to all inquiries. The analytic/synthetic distinction took a decided hit when the noted logician, Willard van Orman Quine, published “Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (1953), challenging its adequacy. Quine argued that the notion of analyticity presupposes the notion of synonymy-in-use, which in turn presupposes understanding inter-substitutability-while-preserving-truth. He claimed none of the notions can be understood without the other, creating a circular relation between them. Thus, matching up a definiens with a definiendum could only be done if we already understood that the definiens specifies the meaning of the word that is being defined—a variation of “the paradox of analysis”, according to which we either already know the meaning of words (in which case analysis is unnecessary) or we do not (in which case it is impossible). The idea of analyticity appeared to have been deposed. The paper created a sensation and has been the most influential philosophical article of the past 100 years. But Quine explicitly allowed for the existence of the class of logical truths (such as “No unmarried man is married”) as narrowly analytic sentences and their relationship to broadly analytic sentences (such as “No bachelor is married”), when the definitional relationship between them has been suitably stipulated (as in “bachelor \(=_{\df}\) unmarried, adult male” in a language framework \(\mathbf{L})\). In cases of this kind, he conceded, inter-substitutability, synonymy, and analyticity are related in an unproblematic way. It would have been odd for a logician to deny the existence of logical truths or the role of stipulations, which are basic to the construction of formal systems, which suggests that he may not have actually defeated the idea of analyticity, after all (Fetzer 1993). Indeed, Carnap (1939) had explained that the process of constructing a vocabulary and a grammar for a language-in-use involves several stages, including observation of the use of language by members of the community, formulating hypotheses regarding the meaning of its phrases and expressions, and drawing inferences about the underlying grammar. These are pragmatic, semantic, and syntactical procedures, respectively, and decisions have to be made in arriving at a theory about the language as the outcome of empirical research. The construction of formal systems thus provides an illustration of the elements of artificial languages, where accounts of natural language counterparts can be subject to further testing and refinement. The linguistic practices of a specific community can thus be modeled and thereby overcome Quine’s professed objections. Moreover, in Fundamentals of Concept Formation in Empirical Science (1952), Hempel had endorsed explication as a method of definition analogous to theory construction by taking words and phrases that are somewhat vague and ambiguous and subjecting them to a process of clarification and disambiguation. Adequate explications are required to satisfy criteria of syntactical determinacy, semantic relevance, and pragmatic benefit (by clarifying and illuminating the meaning of those words and phrases in specific contexts). The word “probability” is vague and ambiguous, for example, but various contexts of its usage can be distinguished and theories of evidential support, relative frequency, and causal propensity can be advanced. Hempel, following Carnap (1950), had accordingly advanced a methodology that dealt with the paradox of analysis before “Two Dogmas”. About the same time, however, Hempel found reasons of his own for doubting that the analytic/synthetic distinction was tenable, which surfaced in his study of dispositional predicates, such as “malleable”, “soluble” and “magnetic”. They designate, not directly observable properties, but (in the case of “magnetic”) tendencies on the part of some kinds of things to display specific reactions (such as attracting small iron objects) under suitable conditions (such as the presence of small iron objects in the vicinity). It is very tempting to define them using the material conditional, “___ \(\supset \ldots\)” by definitions like, which could then be formalized by means of the horseshoe and suitable abbreviations, where “\(t^*\)” is equal to or later than “\(t\)” and reflects that effects brought about by causes entail changes across time. Since the material “if ___ then …” is equivalent to “either not-___ or …”, however, the meaning of (D2) turns out to be logically equivalent to, which means that anything not subject to the test, such as a brown cow, is magnetic. Hempel acknowledged that the use of the subjunctive conditional, say, “___ \(\rightarrow \ldots\)”, formalizing what would be the case … if something ___ were the case, in this case, “if, at \(t\), as small iron object were close to \(x\), then it would move toward \(x\) at \(t^*\)” (which assumes the satisfaction of the test condition) would avoid the problem, because these conditionals take for granted their antecedents are satisfied (that “Sxt” is true). But while acknowledging the importance of subjunctive conditionals for an understanding of both counterfactual conditionals and lawlike sentences, Hempel regarded their explication as not fully satisfactory and their use as “a program, rather than a solution” (Hempel 1952: 25). He therefore adopted a method from Carnap to overcome this difficulty, where, instead of attributing the property in question to anything not subject to the test, the predicate is partially defined by means of a reduction sentence, such as “if, at \(t\), a small iron object is close to \(x\), then \(x\) is magnetic at \(t\) if and only if it moves toward \(x\) at \(t\)” or symbolically, where a biconditional, “___ \(\equiv \ldots\)”, is true when “___” and “…” have the same truth value and otherwise is false. This solved one problem by abandoning the goal of defining the predicate for a partial specification of meaning. But it created another, insofar as, if there should be more than one test/response for a property—such as that, “if \(x\) moves through a closed wire loop at \(t\), then \(x\) is magnetic at \(t\) if and only if an electric current flows in the loop at \(t^*\)”—in conjunction they jointly imply that any object \(x\) that is near small iron objects and moves through a closed wire loop will generate a current in the loop if and only if it attracts those iron objects. But this no longer has the character of even a partial definition but instead that of an empirical law. The prospect that analytic sentences might have synthetic consequences was not a welcome result (Hempel 1952). Carnap (1963) was receptive to the adoption of an intensional methodology that went beyond the constraints of extensional logic, which Hempel (1965b) would consider but leave for others to pursue (Fetzer 1981, 1993). The distinction can be elaborated with respect to the difference between the actual world and alternative possible worlds as sequences of events that diverge from those that define the history of the actual world. If specific conditions that obtained at a specific time had been different, for example, the course of ensuing events would have changed. These intensional methods can be applied to the problems of defining dispositions and the nature of laws by employing descriptions of possible worlds as variations on the actual, not as alternatives that are “as real as” the actual—as David Lewis (2001a,b) has proposed—but as a means for formally specifying the semantic content of subjunctives and counterfactuals (where counterfactuals are subjunctives with false antecedents), using an alternative calculus. There appear to be two broad kinds of justification for subjunctive conditionals, which are logical and ontological, where logical justifications are derived from the grammar and vocabulary of a specific language, such as English. The subjunctive, “If John were a bachelor, then John would be unmarried”, for example, follows from the definition of “bachelor” as “unmarried, adult male”. Analogously, the subjunctive, “If this were gold, then it would be malleable”, could be justified on ontological grounds if being malleable were (let us call it) a permanent attribute of being gold as a reference property, where attributes are “permanent” when there is no process or procedure, natural or contrived, by means of which things having those reference properties could lose those attributes except by no longer possessing those reference properties, even though that is not a logical consequence of their respective definitions (Fetzer 1977). The approach appeals to necessary connections, which are unobservable and therefore unacceptable to Hume. As we shall discover, that they are unobservable doesn’t mean they are empirically untestable. The elaboration of a possible-worlds formal semantics that might be suitable for this purpose, however, requires differentiating between familiar minimal-change semantics, where the world remains the same except for specified changes, and a maximal-change semantics, in which everything can change except for specified properties, which is the ingredient that seems to be required to satisfy the constraints of scientific inquiries as opposed to conversational discourse (Fetzer & Nute 1979, 1980). In the 1950s and 60s, however, Nelson Goodman (1955) and Karl Popper (1965) were attempting to sort out the linkage between dispositions, subjunctives, and laws from distinctive points of view. Hempel’s commitments to extensional logic and to Humean constraints would lead him to endorse an account of laws that was strongly influenced by Goodman and to embrace a pragmatic account that was both epistemically and contextually-dependent. While the analytic/synthetic distinction appears to be justifiable in modeling important properties of languages, the observational/theoretical distinction does not fare equally well. Within logical positivism, observation language was assumed to consist of names and predicates whose applicability or not can be ascertained, under suitable conditions, by means of direct observation (such as using names and predicates for colors, shapes, sounds) or relatively simple measurement (names and predicates for heights, weights, and sizes, for example). This was an epistemic position, of course, since it was sorting them out based upon their accessibility by means of experience. Both theoretical and dispositional predicates, which refer to non-observables, posed serious problems for the positivist position, since the verifiability criterion implies they must be reducible to observables or are empirically meaningless. Karl Popper (1965, 1968), however, would carry the argument in a different direction by looking at the ontic nature of properties. Popper has emphasized that we are theorizing all the time. Consider the observation of a glass full of clear liquid. Suppose it’s water. Then it quenches thirst and extinguishes fires and nourishes plants. But what if it’s alcohol instead? Just describing it as “water” entails innumerable subjunctives about the kinds of responses it would display under a wide variety of test conditions. They are the would be’s of things of that kind. Consider the differences between basket balls, billiard balls, and tennis balls. Things of different kinds can do different things. Even the seemingly simplest observation of a rabbit in the backyard, for example, implies that it is going to display rabbit-like behavior, including eating carrots when my wife puts them out. It is going to hop around and create more rabbits. If it’s a rabbit, it is going to have rabbit DNA. It will not turn out to be stuffed. And this suggested that observational properties and predicates are dispositional, too. From the Humean epistemic perspective, observational, dispositional, and theoretical predicates are successively more and more problematical in relation to their accessibility via experience. The observational describe observable properties of observable entities; the dispositional, unobservable properties of observable entities; and the theoretical, unobservable properties of unobservable entities. Popper suggested that observational and theoretical properties (gravitational strengths electromagnet fields, and such) are ontologically dispositional, too (Popper 1965: 425). But if universals as properties that can be attributed to any member of any possible world are dispositions and the kind of property dispositions are does not depend upon the ease with which their presence or absence can be ascertained, then nomological subjunctives and counterfactuals—taken as instantiations of lawlike generalizations for specific individuals, places, and times—might be explicable as displays of dispositions and of natural necessities (Fetzer 1981). Hempel (1950, 1951), meanwhile, demonstrated that the verifiability criterion could not be sustained. Since it restricts empirical knowledge to observation sentences and their deductive consequences, scientific theories are reduced to logical constructions from observables. In a series of studies about cognitive significance and empirical testability, he demonstrated that the verifiability criterion implies that existential generalizations are meaningful, but that universal generalizations are not, even though they include general laws, the principal objects of scientific discovery. Hypotheses about relative frequencies in finite sequences are meaningful, but hypotheses concerning limits in infinite sequences are not. The verifiability criterion thus imposed a standard that was too strong to accommodate the characteristic claims of science and was not justifiable. Indeed, on the assumption that a sentence \(S\) is meaningful if and only if its negation is meaningful, Hempel demonstrated that the criterion produced consequences that were counterintuitive if not logically inconsistent. The sentence, “At least one stork is red-legged”, for example, is meaningful because it can be verified by observing one red-legged stork; yet its negation, “It is not the case that even one stork is red-legged”, cannot be shown to be true by observing any finite number of red-legged storks and is therefore not meaningful. Assertions about God or The Absolute were meaningless by this criterion, since they are not observation statements or deducible from them. They concern entities that are non-observable. That was a desirable result. But by the same standard, claims that were made by scientific laws and theories were also meaningless. Indeed, scientific theories affirming the existence of gravitational attractions and of electromagnetic fields were thus rendered comparable to beliefs about transcendent entities such as an omnipotent, omniscient, and omni-benevolent God, for example, because no finite sets of observation sentences are sufficient to deduce the existence of entities of those kinds. These considerations suggested that the logical relationship between scientific theories and empirical evidence cannot be exhausted by means of observation sentences and their deductive consequences alone, but needs to include observation sentences and their inductive consequences as well (Hempel 1958). More attention would now be devoted to the notions of testability and of confirmation and disconfirmation as forms of partial verification and partial falsification, where Hempel would recommend an alternative to the standard conception of scientific theories to overcome otherwise intractable problems with the observational/theoretical distinction.