 Hempel’s critics—both early and late—have not always shown an appreciation for the full dimensions of his explication. Michael Scriven (1959), for example, once objected to “the deductive model, with its syllogistic form, where no student of elementary logic could fail to complete the inference, given the premise” (1959: 462), when no restriction is placed on the complexity of the relevant laws or the intricacy of these deductions (Hempel 1965c: 339). Similar objections have been lodged more recently by William Bechtel and Adele Abrahamsen (2005), for example, who claim, in defense of “the mechanist alternative”, that, among its many benefits, investigators are not limited to linguistic representations and logical inference in presenting explanations but frequently employ diagrams and reasoning about mechanisms by simulating them. (2005: 421) Hempel’s conditions of adequacy, however, are capable of satisfaction without their presentation as formal arguments. Hempel remarks that his model of explanation does not directly apply to the wordless gesticulations of a Yugoslavian automobile mechanic or guarantee that explanations that are adequate are invariably subjectively satisfying. His purpose was to formalize the conditions that must be satisfied when an explanation is adequate without denying that background knowledge and prior beliefs frequently make a difference in ordinary conversational contexts. Jan might not know some of the antecedent conditions, Jim might have misunderstood the general laws, or features of the explanandum event may have been missed by them both. Even when information is conveyed using diagrams and simulations, for example, as long as it satisfies conditions (CA-1) through (CA-4)—no matter whether those conditions are satisfied implicitly or explicitly—an adequate scientific explanation is at hand. But it has to satisfy all four of those requirements. Demonstrating that an adequate scientific explanation is at hand, however, imposes demands beyond the acquisition of information about initial conditions and laws. In the examiner’s sense of knowledge Ian Hacking identified (Hacking 1967: 319), to prove an adequate scientific explanation is available, it would be necessary to show that each of Hempel’s adequacy conditions has been satisfied. It would not be enough to show, say, that one person is knowledgeable about the initial conditions, another about the covering laws, and a third about the explanandum. It would be necessary to show that the explanandum can be derived from the explanans, that those laws were required for the derivation, and that the initial conditions were those present on that occasion. (CA-1)–(CA-4) qualifies as a “check list” to insure that a scientific explanation is adequate. Students of Hempel have found it very difficult to avoid the impression that Hempel was not only defending the position that every adequate scientific explanation is potentially predictive but also the position that every adequate scientific prediction is potentially explanatory. This impression is powerfully reinforced in “The Theoretician’s Dilemma” (Hempel 1958), where, in the course of demonstrating that the function of theories goes beyond merely establishing connections between observables, he offers this passage: Scientific explanations, predictions, and postdictions all have the same logical character: they show that the fact under consideration can be inferred from certain other facts by means of specified general laws. In the simplest case, the type of argument may be schematized as a deductive inference of the following form [here substituting the “simplest case” for the abstract schemata presented in the original]: Figure 3. A Covering-Law Explanation … While explanation, prediction, and postdiction are alike in their logical structure, they differ in certain other respects. For example, an argument [like Figure 3 above] will qualify as a prediction only if [its explanandum] refers to an occurrence at a time later than that at which the argument is offered; in the case of postdiction, the event must occur before the presentation of the argument. These differences, however, require no further study here, for the purpose of the preceding discussion was simply to point out the role of general laws in scientific explanation, prediction, and postdiction (Hempel 1958: 37–38). What is crucial about this passage is Hempel’s emphasis on the pragmatic consideration of the time at which the argument is presented in relation to the time of occurrence of the explanandum event itself. Let us take this to be the observation that \(c\) is black and assume that occurs at a specific time \(t_1\). If the argument is presented prior to time \(t_1\) (before observing that \(c\) is black), then it is a prediction. If the argument is presented after time \(t_1\) (after observing that \(c\) is black), then it is a postdiction. Since explanations are usually advanced after the time of the occurrence of the event to be explained, they usually occur as postdictions. But there is nothing about their form that requires that. As Hempel uses the term, reasoning is “scientific” when it involves inferences with laws. Indeed, this appears to be the principal ground upon which he wants to maintain that explanations, predictions, and postdictions share the same logical form. His position here makes it logically impossible for explanations, predictions and postdictions to not have the same logical form. If there are modes of prediction that are non-explanatory, such as might be the case when they are based upon accidental generalizations, then they would not thereby demonstrate that the symmetry thesis does not hold for the kinds of distinctively “scientific” explanations that are the focus of his work. Scriven’s cow example, for example, does not show that the symmetry thesis does not hold for scientific explanations and scientific predictions, even if it shows that some ordinary predictions are not also ordinary explanations. But other counter-examples posed greater threats. Indeed, in the process of drawing the distinction between explanation-seeking and reason-seeking why-questions, Hempel (1965c) proposed a different kind of symmetry thesis, where adequate answers to explanation-seeking why-questions also provide adequate answers to reason-seeking why-questions, but not conversely. That was very appropriate, since the purpose of reason-seeking why-questions is to establish grounds for believing that the event described by the explanandum sentence has taken (or will take) place, while explanation-seeking why-questions typically take for granted that we know their explanandum events have already occurred. It follows that, while Hempel’s conditions are meant to specify when we know why, they also entail how we know that. Insofar as Hempel focused on logically equivalent formulations of lawlike sentences in addressing the paradoxes of confirmation, some may find it remarkable that he does not explore the consequences of logically equivalent formulations in relation to explanations. We tend to assume we can explain why a specific thing \(c\) is black on the grounds that it is a raven and all ravens are black. Yet we would hesitate to explain why a specific thing is not a raven on the ground that it is not black. We may refer to this as the paradox of transposition. Notice, the contention that one member of a class of logically equivalent hypotheses is explanatory but others are not generates “paradoxes of explanation” that parallel the “paradoxes of confirmation” (Fetzer 2000a). Figure 4 offers an illustration: Figure 4. The Transposition Paradox Even if we accept the transposed form of “\((x)(Rx \supset Bx)\)” as the basis for an answer to a reason-seeking why-question—in this case, how we know that \(c\) is no raven—Figure 4 surely does not explain why that is the case, which presumably has to do with the genes of entity \(c\) and its developmental history as a living thing. If logically equivalent forms equally qualify as lawlike—there’s no basis in extensional logic to deny it—then Hempel confronts a dilemma. In fact, by his own conditions of adequacy, this argument is not only explanatory but also predictive. It is not a “postdiction” as he has defined it above, but it appears to qualify as a “retrodiction” that does not explain its explanandum event. Suppose Hempel were to resort to Goodman’s approach and deny that the negation of a purely qualitative predicates is also a purely qualitative predicate. That would mean that sentences logically equivalent to lawlike sentences—which have the same content—are not therefore also lawlike by invoking pragmatic differences in their degree of entrenchment and projectibility of their constituent predicates. An appeal to pragmatic considerations within this context has a decidedly ad hoc quality about it, which appears to contravene the spirit of the paradoxes of confirmation, where Hempel insists that the counterintuitive cases are confirmatory and their paradoxical character is merely psychological. Even if Hempel were to adopt this position and take for granted that one member of a class of logically equivalent sentences can be lawlike while the others are not, another difficulty arises from the use of modus tollens in lieu of modus ponens, as Figure 5 exemplifies: Figure 5. The Modus Tollens Paradox Here we have a more threatening problem, since there is no apparent basis for denying that an argument having this form satisfies Hempel’s criteria and therefore ought to be both explanatory and predictive. Similarly for temporally quantified arguments, where the fact that a match of kind \(K\) has not lighted at \(t^*\) would certainly not be adequate to explain why it was not struck at t, even though every match of kind \(K\) will light when it is struck, under suitable conditions! Something serious thus appears to be wrong (Fetzer 2000a). The adoption of an alternative theory of laws that incorporates Hempel’s commitment to universal generality and to purely qualitative predicates, but abandons Goodman’s pragmatic entanglements, might offer solutions for these problems. One such account has been advanced by David Armstrong (1983), who embraces three basic assumptions: (a) realism (the thesis that laws exist apart from any human minds); (b) actualism (the thesis that laws and properties exist only if they are instantiated); and (c) naturalism (the thesis that nothing exists except “the single, spatio-temporal, world, the world studied by physics, chemistry, cosmology, and so on”, 1983: 76). These theses harbor an equivocation, however, since, if there can be uninstantiated laws and properties, actualism is false and naturalism might also not be true—unless “the single, spatio-temporal, world” includes uninstantiated as well as instantiated properties and laws (1983: 76). Since Armstrong endorses realism about universals (according to which properties are not reducible to their class of instances), there appears to be a certain tension between his realism and his actualism. Armstrong abandons the Humean account of universal laws as constant conjunctions and of statistical laws as relative frequencies, which are both extensional in character, for the alternative conception of laws as intensional relations between properties, which are connected by (what he characterizes as) primitive relations of necessitation and of probabilification, respectively. When a thing’s being \(F\) necessitates its being \(G\), which he formalizes as “\(N(F, G)\)”—where being gold may be said to necessitate being malleable, for example—then everything that is \(F\) will also be \(G\), so that a corresponding extensional generalization, “\((x)(Fx \supset Gx)\)” must be true, but not conversely. This marks an advance in dealing with accidental generalizations, since, even if every Volkswagen were painted grey, it would not follow that being grey is necessitated by being a Volkswagen, when, for example, there are processes and procedures, such as repainting them, that could be performed to violate that generalization, which cannot occur with bona fide laws. He argues that his notion of physical necessitation is not the same as the counterpart notion of logical necessitation, where the former, unlike the latter, is non-symmetrical and cannot be transposed. The adoption of this approach, therefore, would resolve the paradox of transposition, since “\(N(F, G)\)” is no longer logically equivalent to “\(N(\neg G, \neg F)\)”. Armstrong attempts to assimilate statistical to universal laws by their interpretation as necessitations of less than (let us say) universal strength. On this view, the logical form of statistical laws turns out to be “\(N:P(F, G)\)” and that of universal laws “\(N:1(F, G)\)”, where the value of “\(P\)” equals any (possibly infinitesimal) number between 0 and 1. Armstrong appeals to the non-existence of negative properties to support the nontranposability of necessitations, but there are hidden dangers either way: when “\(N:1(F, G)\)”, then “\(N:0(F, \neg G)\)”, necessarily; when “\(N:P(F, G)\)”, necessarily, “\(N:1-P(F, \neg G)\)”. They seem unavoidable. Even more important than preserving the addition and summation of probabilifications, the distinction between permanent and transient properties introduced in Section 2.1 provides an ontological basis for these differences, which Armstrong does not supply. The presence of \(G\) is not part of the definition of “\(F\)”, which requires that “\([ ](Fx \supset Gx)\)” be false in \(\mathbf{L}\), where “[ ]” stands for logical necessity; yet there is no process or procedure, natural or contrived, by means of which a permanent property \(G\) can be taken away from something that is \(F\) except by making it no longer \(F\). The properties that things can have or lose and remain things of that kind are transient (Fetzer 1981, 1993). Being yellow, malleable, and a metal are some permanent properties of gold, while having a particular shape, being owned by a specific person, or having a certain selling price are not. Lawlike sentences are then logically contingent, subjunctive conditionals that reflect permanent property relations. The adoption of a more adequate theory of laws, moreover, would be consistent with Hempel’s conditions of adequacy and support his schemata, as Figure 6 displays: Figure 6. A D-N Explanation Schema Thus, when \(G\) is a permanent property of \(F\), it does not mean that the absence of \(F\) is a permanent property of the absence of \(G\), which conflates logical and physical necessities and contradicts the assumption of contingency (Fetzer 1981: 193–4; Fetzer 2000a). It follows that “\((x)(Fxt \rightarrow Gx)\)” is not logically equivalent to “\((x)(\neg Gx \rightarrow \neg Fx)\)”, even though it entails the corresponding extensional generalization, “\((x)(Fx \supset Gx)\)”, which can account for differences between explanations and predictions based on them. The paradox of transposition is overcome, because lawlike sentences are not transposable. Subjunctives can be true even when they have no instances; indeed, counterfactuals are subjunctives with false antecedents. Actualism thus appears to be dispensable. But the modus tollens paradox endures, suggesting something is still not quite right. Even the adoption of a better theory of laws is not enough to exonerate Hempel’s adequacy conditions.