 As connectionist research has matured from its “Golden Age” in the 1980s, the main paradigm has radiated into a number of distinct approaches. Two important trends worth mention are predicative coding and deep learning (which will be covered in the following section). Predictive coding is a well-established information processing tool with a wide range of applications. It is useful, for example, in compressing the size of data sets. Suppose you wish to transmit a picture of a landscape with a blue sky. Since most of the pixels in the top half of your image are roughly the same shade, it is very inefficient to record the color value (say Red: 46 Green: 78 Blue: FF in hexadecimal) over and over again for each pixel in the top half of the image. Since the value of one pixel strongly predicts the value of its neighbor, the efficient thing to do is record at each pixel location, the difference between the predicted value (an average of its neighbors) and the actual value for that pixel. (In the case of representing an even shaded sky, we would only need to record the blue value once, followed by lots of zeros.) This way, major coding resources are only needed to keep track of points in the image (such as edges) where there are large changes, that is points of “surprise” or “unexpected” variation. It is well known that early visual processing in the brain involves taking differences between nearby values, (for example, to identify visual boundaries). It is only natural then to explore how the brain might take advantage of predictive coding in perception, inference, or even action. (See Clark 2013 for an excellent summary and entry point to the literature.) There is wide variety in the models presented in the predictive coding paradigm, and they tend to be specified at a higher level of generality than are connectionist models so far discussed. Assume we have a neural net with input, hidden and output levels that has been trained on a task (say face recognition) and so presumably has information about faces stored in the weights connecting the hidden level nodes. Three features would classify this net as a predictive coding (PC) model. First, the model will have downward connections from the higher levels that are able to predict the next input for that task. (The prediction might be a representation of a generic face.) Second, the data sent to the higher levels for a given input is not the value recorded at the input nodes, but the difference between the predicted values and the values actually present. (So in the example, the data provided tracks the differences between the face to be recognized and the generic face.) In this way the data being received by the net is already preprocessed for coding efficiency. Third, the model is trained by adjusting the weights in such a way that the error is minimized at the inputs. In other words, the trained net reduces as much as possible the “surprise” registered in the difference between the raw input and its prediction. In so doing it comes to be able to predict the face of the individual to be recognized to eliminate the error. Some advocates of predictive coding models suggest that this scheme provides a unified account of all cognitive phenomena, including perception, reasoning, planning and motor control. By minimizing prediction error in interacting with the environment, the net is forced to develop the conceptual resources to model the causal structure of the external world, and so navigate that world more effectively. The predictive coding (PC) paradigm has attracted a lot of attention. There is ample evidence that PC models capture essential details of visual function in the mammalian brain (Rao & Ballard 1999; Huang & Rao 2011). For example, when trained on typical visual input, PC models spontaneously develop functional areas for edge, orientation and motion detection known to exist in visual cortex. This work also raises the interesting point that the visual architecture may develop in response to the statistics of the scenes being encountered, so that organisms in different environments have visual systems specially tuned to their needs. It must be admitted that there is still no convincing evidence that the essential features of PC models are directly implemented as anatomical structures in the brain. Although it is conjectured that superficial pyramidal cells may transmit prediction error, and deep pyramidal cells predictions, we do not know that that is how they actually function. On the other hand, PC models do appear more neurally plausible than backpropagation architectures, for there is no need for a separate process of training on an externally provided set of training samples. Instead, predictions replace the role of the training set, so that learning and interacting with the environment are two sides of a unified unsupervised process. PC models also show promise for explaining higher-level cognitive phenomena. An often-cited example is binocular rivalry. When presented with entirely different images in two eyes, humans report an oscillation between the two images as each in turn comes into “focus”. The PC explanation is that the system succeeds in eliminating error by predicting the scene for one eye, but only to increase the error for the other eye. So the system is unstable, “hunting” from one prediction to the other. Predictive coding also has a natural explanation for why we are unaware of our blind spot, for the lack of input in that area amounts to a report of no error, with the result that one perceives “more of the same”. PC accounts of attention have also been championed. For example, Hohwy (2012) notes that realistic PC models, which must tolerate noisy inputs, need to include parameters that track the desired precision to be used in reporting error. So PC models need to make predictions of the error precision relevant for a given situation. Hohwy explores the idea that mechanisms for optimizing precision expectations map onto those that account for attention, and argues that attentional phenomena such as change blindness can be explained within the PC paradigm. Predictive coding has interesting implications for themes in the philosophy of cognitive science. By integrating the processes of top-down prediction with bottom-up error detection, the PC account of perception views it as intrinsically theory-laden. Deployment of the conceptual categorization of the world embodied in higher levels of the net is essential to the very process of gathering data about the world. This underscores, as well, tight linkages between belief, imaginative abilities, and perception (Grush 2004). The PC paradigm also tends to support situated or embodied conceptions of cognition, for it views action as a dynamic interaction between the organism’s effects on the environment, its predictions concerning those effects (its plans), and its continual monitoring of error, which provides feedback to help ensure success. It is too early to evaluate the importance and scope of PC models in accounting for the various aspects of cognition. Providing a unified theory of brain function in general is, after all, an impossibly high standard. Clark’s target article (2013) provides a useful forum for airing complaints against PC models and some possible responses. One objection that is often heard is that an organism with a PC brain can be expected to curl up in a dark room and die, for this is the best way to minimize error at its sensory inputs. However, that view may take too narrow a view of the sophistication of the predictions available to the organism. If it is to survive at all, its genetic endowment coupled with what it can learn along the way may very well endow it with the expectation that it go out and seek needed resources in the environment. Minimizing error for that prediction of its behavior will get it out of the dark room. However, it remains to be seen whether a theory of biological urges is usefully recast in PC terminology in this way, or whether PC theory is better characterized as only part of the explanation. Another complaint is that the top-down influence on our perception coupled with the constraint that the brain receives error signals rather than raw data would impose an unrealistic divide between a represented world of fantasy and the world as it really is. It is hard to evaluate whether that qualifies as a serious objection. Were PC models actually to provide an account of our phenomenological experience, and characterize the relations between that experience and what we count as real, then skeptical conclusions to be drawn would count as features of the view rather than objections to it. A number of responders to Clark’s target article also worry that PC-models count as overly general. In trying to explain everything they explain nothing. Without sufficient constraints on the architecture, it is too easy to pretend to explain cognitive phenomena by merely redescribing them in a story written in the vocabulary of prediction, comparison, error minimization, and optimized precision. The real proof of the pudding will come with the development of more complex and detailed computer models in the PC framework that are biologically plausible, and able to demonstrate the defining features of cognition.