 Famously, Descartes puts forward a very simple candidate as the “first item of knowledge.” The candidate is suggested by methodical doubt – by the very effort at thinking all my thoughts might be mistaken. Early in the Second Meditation, Descartes has his meditator observe: As the canonical formulation has it, I think therefore I am (Latin: cogito ergo sum; French: je pense, donc je suis) – a formulation does not expressly appear in the Meditations. Descartes regards the ‘cogito’ (as it is often referred to) as the “first and most certain of all to occur to anyone who philosophizes in an orderly way” (Prin. 1:7, AT8a:7, CSM 1:195). Is the great certainty of the cogito supposed to attach to the “I think,” the “I am,” or the “therefore” (i.e., their logical relation)? Presumably, it must attach to all of these, if the cogito is to play the foundational role Descartes assigns to it. But this answer can seem to depend on whether the cogito is understood as an inference or an intuition – an issue we address below. Testing the cogito by means of methodical doubt is supposed to reveal its unshakable certainty. Hyperbolic doubt helps me appreciate that the existence of my body is subject to doubt, whereas the existence of my thinking is not. The very attempt at thinking away my thinking is indeed self-stultifying. The cogito raises numerous philosophical questions and has generated an enormous literature. The most significant ongoing debate concerns whether Descartes intends the cogito to be an intuition (i.e., roughly, self-evident), or instead an inference. In an influential 1962 paper, Jaakko Hintikka’s argues that it should be understood non-inferentially, as a performative utterance. On his analysis, I exist doesn’t follow logically from I think, nor does Descartes suppose otherwise. Rather, the transition from I think to I exist is non-logical – indeed, the statement that “I do not exist” is not logically incoherent. The key point, according to Hintikka, is that the very act of thinking that statement – the cognitive performance – is existentially incoherent: I cannot both think the statement and believe it to be true. Hintikka takes the emphasis on “cogito” as intended “to express the performatory character of Descartes’s insight; it refers to the ‘performance’ (to the act of thinking) through which the sentence ‘I exist’ may be said to verify itself” (1962, 17). The following Second Replies text can seem supportive of a non-inferential reading: However, as Margaret Wilson correctly observes, “the claim that the cogito is an inference … is not equivalent to the claim that it is a syllogism” (1978, 56). The passage only expressly rejects the effort to understand the cogito in terms of syllogism, but not necessarily in terms of inference. Further, it should be noted that inferential interpretations need not reject that the cogito counts also as an intuition. There’s no inconsistency in claiming a self-evident grasp of a proposition that has inferential structure. It is indeed widely held among philosophers that modus ponens is self-evident, yet it contains an inference. In short, that a statement contains an inference does not entail that one’s acceptance of it is grounded in inference – a fact applicable to the cogito. Curley helpfully notes that Descartes “consistently blurs the distinction between inferences and propositions by referring to the whole formula ‘I think, therefore I am’ as a truth, a first principle, a proposition, and a conclusion” (1978, 79). Kenny adds that, for Descartes, “what is from one point of view intuited is from another point of view deduced” (1968, 55), citing Rules 3 as support. A related point concerns the absence of an express ‘ergo’ (‘therefore’) in the Second Meditation account – as if indicating the absence of inference in that passage. Arguably, the Second Meditation passage is the one place (of his various published treatments ) where Descartes explicitly details a line of inferential reflection leading up to the conclusion that I am, I exist. His other treatments merely say the ‘therefore’; the Second Meditation unpacks it. Whatever the cogito’s inferential status, it is worth noting a twofold observation of Barry Stroud: “a thinker obviously could never be wrong in thinking ‘I think’,” moreover, “no one who thinks could think falsely that he exists” (2008, 518). Further issues about the cogito are worth clarifying – let’s cover a few points in summary fashion. First, a first-person formulation is essential to the certainty of the cogito. Third-person claims, such as “Icarus thinks,” or “Descartes thinks,” are not unshakably certain – not for me, at any rate; only the occurrence of my thought has a chance of resisting hyperbolic doubt. There are a number of passages in which Descartes refers to a third-person version of the cogito. But none of these occurs in the context of establishing the actual existence of a particular thinker (in contrast with the conditional, general result that whatever thinks exists). Second, a present tense formulation is essential to the certainty of the cogito. It’s no good to reason that “I existed last Tuesday, since I recall that I was thinking on that day.” For all I know, I’m now merely dreaming about that occasion. Nor does it work to reason that “I’ll continue to exist, since I’m now thinking.” As the meditator remarks, “it could be that were I totally to cease from thinking, I should totally cease to exist” (Med. 2, AT 7:27, CSM 2:18). The privileged certainty of the cogito is grounded in the “manifest contradiction” (AT 7:36, CSM 2:25) of trying to think away my present thinking. Third, the certainty of the cogito depends on being formulated in terms of cogitatio – i.e., my thinking, or awareness/consciousness more generally. Any mode of thinking is sufficient, including doubting, affirming, denying, willing, understanding, imagining, and so on (cf. Med. 2, AT 7:28). My bodily activities, however, are insufficient. For instance, it’s no good to reason that “I exist, since I am walking,” because methodical doubt calls into question the existence of my legs. Maybe I’m just dreaming that I have legs. A simple revision, such as “I exist, since it seems I’m walking,” restores the anti-sceptical potency (cf. Replies 5, AT 7:352; Prin. 1:9). Fourth, a caveat is in order. That Descartes rejects formulations presupposing the existence of a body commits him to no more than an epistemic distinction between the ideas of mind and body, but not (yet) an ontological distinction (as in mind-body dualism). Indeed, in the passage following the cogito, Descartes has his meditator say: In short, the intended epistemic success of the cogito does not presuppose any particular mind-body ontology. Finally, Descartes’ reference to an “I”, in the “I think,” is not intended to presuppose the existence of a substantial self. In the very next sentence following the initial statement of the cogito, the meditator says: “But I do not yet have a sufficient understanding of what this ‘I’ is, that now necessarily exists” (AT 7:25, CSM 2:17). As Stephen Menn writes: The cogito purports to yield certainty that I exist insofar as I am a thinking thing, whatever that turns out to be. The ensuing discussion is intended to help arrive at an understanding of the ontological nature of the thinking subject. More generally, we should distinguish issues of epistemic and ontological dependence. In the final analysis, Descartes thinks he shows that the occurrence of thought depends (ontologically) on the existence of a substantial self – to wit, on the existence of an infinite substance, namely God (cf. Med. 3, AT 7:48ff). But he denies that an acceptance of these ontological matters is epistemically prior to the cogito: its certainty is not supposed to depend (epistemically) on the abstruse metaphysics that Descartes thinks he eventually establishes. (See Vinci 1998 for an alternative reading.) If the cogito does not presuppose a substantial self, what then is the epistemic basis for injecting the “I” into the “I think”? Some critics have complained that, in referring to the “I”, Descartes begs the question by presupposing what he means to establish in the “I exist.” Among the critics, Bertrand Russell objects that “the word ‘I’ is really illegitimate.” Echoing the 18th century thinker, Georg Lichtenberg, Russell writes that Descartes should have, instead, stated “his ultimate premiss in the form ‘there are thoughts’.” Russell adds that “the word ‘I’ is grammatically convenient, but does not describe a datum.” (1945, 567) Accordingly, “there is pain” and “I am in pain” have different contents, and Descartes is entitled only to the former. One effort at reply has it that introspection reveals more than what Russell allows – it reveals the subjective character of experience. On this view, there is more to the experiential story of being in pain than is expressed by saying that there is pain: the experience includes the feeling of pain plus a point-of-view – an experiential addition that’s difficult to characterize except by adding that “I” am in pain, that the pain is mine. Importantly, my awareness of this subjective feature of experience does not depend on an awareness of the metaphysical nature of a thinking subject. If we take Descartes to be using ‘I’ to signify this subjective character, then he is not smuggling in something that’s not already there: the “I”-ness of consciousness turns out to be (contra Russell) a primary datum of experience. Though, as Hume persuasively argues, introspection reveals no sense impressions suited to the role of a thinking subject, Descartes, unlike Hume, has no need to derive all our ideas from sense impressions. Descartes’ idea of the self does ultimately draw on innate conceptual resources. But how could ideas deriving from the subjective character of experience justify a substantive metaphysical conclusion about the existence of a real self? On one plausible line of reply, Descartes does not yet intend to be establishing the metaphysical result; rather, the initial intended result is merely epistemic, but not (yet) fully justified. This line of interpretation does, of course, imply that the cogito does not initially count as perfect knowledge – an issue to which we now turn. The extraordinary certainty and doubt-resistance of the cogito marks an Archimedean turning point in the meditator’s inquiry. However, there are interpretive disputes about whether Descartes intends the cogito to count – at its initial introduction, prior to the arguments for God – as fully indubitable, and therefore as perfect knowledge. It is quite common to interpret the cogito as being the first item of perfect knowledge. In  Section 6.1  we’ll explore how such interpretations (i.e., Bounded Doubt Interpretations) render Descartes broader argument. But here, I want to develop the textual case for holding that even the cogito is undermined by Evil Genius Doubt. There is no disputing that Descartes characterizes the cogito as the “first item of knowledge [cognitione]” (Med. 3, AT 7:35, CSM 2:24), and as the first “piece of knowledge [cognitio]” (Prin. 1:7, AT 8a:7, CSM 1:195). Noteworthy, however, is the Latin terminology Descartes uses in these characterizations (‘cognitio’ and its cognates). As noted at the outset, Descartes is a contextualist in the sense of invoking the notion of knowledge in divergent contexts that presuppose very different epistemic standards. Of particular interest is that he expressly clarifies that contexts aptly characterized in terms of cognitio-talk do not necessary count as perfect knowledge: This alone does not prove that the cogito is not intended to count as perfect knowledge. However, it does undercut the argument whereby calling it the “first item of knowledge” shows that Descartes intends it as perfect knowledge. More generally, a wide range of clear texts support (what I’ll call) the No Atheistic Perfect Knowledge Thesis – a thesis with implications for the debate about the cogito. Consider the following texts, each arising in a context of clarifying the requirements of perfect knowledge (italics are added): For if I do not know this [i.e., “whether there is a God, and, if there is, whether he can be a deceiver”], it seems that I can never be quite certain about anything else. (Med. 3, AT 7:36, CSM 2:25) I see that the certainty of all other things depends on this [i.e., “that the supreme being exists”], so that without it nothing can ever be perfectly known [perfecte sciri]. (Med. 5, AT 7:69, CSM 2:48) [I]f I were unaware of God … I should thus never have true and certain knowledge [scientiam] about anything, but only shifting and changeable opinions. (Med. 5, AT 7:69, CSM 2:48) Thus I see plainly that the certainty and truth of all knowledge [scientiae] depends uniquely on my awareness of the true God, to such an extent that I was incapable of perfect knowledge [perfecte scire] about anything else until I became aware of him. (Med. 5, AT 7:71, CSM 2:49) These texts make a powerful case that nothing else can be perfectly known prior to establishing that we’re created by an all-perfect God, rather than an evil genius. These texts make no exceptions. The first text is particularly noteworthy, because it comes at the end of a paragraph expressly citing the cogito. As Curley writes: Descartes looks to hold that hyperbolic doubt is utterly unbounded – i.e., that it undermines all manner of propositions, including thereby the proposition that “I exist.” We can indeed read the opening paragraphs of the Third Meditation as intended to clarify not that the cogito is perfectly known, but instead the following two-fold point: First, that what underwrites the cogito’s epistemic impressiveness is clarity and distinctness. Second, that even cognitions this impressive can be undermined by Evil Genius Doubt, and thus lack the full indubitability of perfect knowledge. Regarding the first point, the Third Meditation opens with meditator attempting to build on the apparent success of the cogito. What are the internal marks of this impressive perception – what is it like to have perception that good? The answer: The next two paragraphs help clarify (among other things) what Descartes takes to be epistemically impressive about clear and distinct perception, but absent from external sense perception. Of external sensation, the third paragraph offers this: Though we regularly form judgments based on external sensation, they are easily undermined by sceptical doubt, as shown by the Now Dreaming Doubt. By contrast, our clear and distinct perceptions enjoy a perceptual “strength” enabling us to ward off even the Evil Genius Doubt (at least, so it might seem). The fourth paragraph offers this: Prima facie, this excerpt suggests that multiple propositions are – at this pre-theistic stage of the broader argument – fully indubitable, thereby counting as perfect knowledge. But there is more to the paragraph. This brings us to the second point noted above, namely, that even cognitions this impressive can be undermined by Evil Genius Doubt – an outcome clarified in the final lines of this same paragraph: In order to appreciate the subtleties of this pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation, we need to clarify the indirect manner in which Evil Genius Doubt operates on clear and distinct perception. How could a doubt undermine the cogito? Part of its impressiveness is that I cannot think about my existence without affirming it, yet I cannot doubt my existence without thinking about it. In short, I simply cannot doubt the proposition “I exist” – or so it appears. Seeming to reinforce further the suspicion that the cogito cannot be doubted is a more general thesis Descartes holds concerning the doubt-resistance of any matters that are clearly and distinctly perceived: [T]he nature of my mind is such that I cannot but assent to these things, at least so long as I clearly perceive them. (Med. 5, AT 7:65, CSM 2:45) [M]y nature is such that so long as I perceive something very clearly and distinctly I cannot but believe it to be true. (Med. 5, AT 7:69, CSM 2:48) How, then, is it possible to doubt such matters? According to one interpretation, the answer is that we cannot doubt them directly, however, we can doubt them in an indirect manner. That is, rather than directing the doubt at particular such propositions, as that I exist, or that 2+3=5, the doubt is instead directed at the cognitive faculties by which we apprehend such propositions. By way of analogy, consider that if a calculator were defective, it would cast doubt on any calculations it generated. Likewise, if my own mind were in some sense defective, this would cast doubt on any matters I apprehended – no matter how evident those matters might seem. By directing the doubt at the veracity of my own cognitive faculties, I do thereby indirectly doubt the particular propositions apprehended by means of those faculties. A wealth of texts support that this is how the Evil Genius Doubt is intended to operate. Consider these (italics are added): [Perhaps some God could have given me a nature such that I was deceived even in matters which seemed most evident. (Med. 3, AT 7:36, CSM 2:25) I can convince myself that I have a natural disposition to go wrong from time to time in matters which I think I perceive as evidently as can be. (Med. 5, AT 7:70, CSM 2:48) I saw nothing to rule out the possibility that my natural constitution made me prone to error even in matters which seemed to me most true. (Med. 6, AT 7:77, CSM 2:53) [T]he most serious doubt [arises] from our ignorance about whether our nature might not be such as to make us go wrong even in matters which seemed to us utterly evident. (Prin. 1:30; AT 8a:16, CSM 1:203) As each passage conveys, the doubt is directed not at the particular object level propositions undermined, but at the possibility of our having a defective cognitive nature. (In this vein, Carriero helpfully refers to the doubt under the heading, ‘imperfect-nature doubt’ (2009, 27), rather than Evil Genius Doubt.) As each passage also conveys, the doubt effectively undermines even the “most evident” of matters. Because the doubt is indirect, it’s blind to the particular propositions it undercuts. The relevant question does arguably shift from, “How could a doubt undermine the cogito?”, to “How could this doubt fail to undermine even the cogito?” Indeed, the first of the above passages expressly includes the cogito with the list of example propositions being indirectly called into doubt – this, in the pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation: The suggestion is of an epistemic schizophrenia, of sorts, depending on whether one’s attention is directed at the object level propositions, or instead at the possibility of our having defective cognitive faculties: Moments of epistemic optimism: While I am directly attending to a proposition, perceiving it clearly and distinctly, I enjoy an irresistible cognitive luminance and my assent is compelled. Moments of epistemic pessimism: When no longer directly attending – no longer perceiving the proposition clearly and distinctly – I can entertain the sceptical hypothesis that such feelings of cognitive luminance are epistemically worthless, indeed arising from a defective cognitive nature. Granted, this indirect doubt is exceedingly hyperbolic. Even so, it entails that we lack the full indubitability requisite to perfect knowledge. Descartes thus closes the pivotal fourth paragraph, clarifying that because of the Evil Genius Doubt, nothing (yet) meets the epistemic standard of perfect knowledge: A later Third Meditation passage – but one occurring prior to the arguments for God – can be taken to suggest a very different interpretation. On this alternative account, some of the matters we clearly and distinctly perceive are fully indubitable, thereby counting as perfect knowledge even prior to knowledge of God. The passage has Descartes drawing a distinction between what is revealed by the natural light, and what is taught by nature: The passage makes clear that the cogito is revealed by the natural light. On the interpretation at issue, Descartes’ point is that such matters admit of a privileged sort of doubt-resistance, whereby they “cannot in any way be open to doubt.” On this understanding, the scope of Evil Genius Doubt is bounded, in that not all propositions are vulnerable to the doubt. This is to say that some propositions, including the cogito, may be fully indubitable, thus satisfying the requirements of perfect knowledge – even for atheists. Defenders of an unbounded doubt interpretation would offer a different analysis of the passage. First, we saw that Descartes earlier claimed that what grounds the extraordinary certainty of the cogito is that “there is simply a clear and distinct perception.” Yet, that earlier claim is surprising, if the point of the above passage is that the natural light is epistemically superior to mere garden variety clarity and distinctness. A remark Descartes makes to Hobbes is relevant: “As everyone knows, a ‘light in the intellect’ means transparent clarity of cognition.” (Replies 3, AT 7:192, CSM 2:135) This suggests that “natural light” references are simply another way of talking about clear and distinct perception. On this point, Carriero notes: “I do not see an important distinction for Descartes between something’s being revealed to me by the light of nature and my perceiving clearly that thing’s being the case” (2008, 305). Note further that a bounded doubt interpretation of this passage is at odds with the numerous other passages we’ve examined indicating that even the cogito is vulnerable to the Evil Genius Doubt. How, then, do unbounded doubt interpreters deal with this passage? In context, the point of the natural light passage is not to draw a distinction between two grades of clear and distinct perception; it’s instead to clarify the distinction between the kind of probabilistic reasoning the meditator had invoked in prior remarks, and the irresistible evidentness accompanying our very best cognitions, such as the cogito. We can indeed take the point of the passage to apply to moments of careful attention: even while directly attending to the probabilistic matters (taught by nature), we recognize that there are grounds for doubt; whereas, when directly attending to our epistemically best cognitions (revealed by the natural light), we simply cannot doubt them. This reading renders the passage continuous with our reading of the other passages. Again, in the pivotal fourth paragraph of the Third Meditation: “when I turn to the things themselves which I think I perceive very clearly, I am so convinced by them that I spontaneously declare: let whoever can do so deceive me, he will never bring it about that I am nothing, so long as I continue to think I am something”; i.e., while directly attending to them, the matters revealed by the natural light “cannot in any way be open to doubt.” And yet, upon diverting attention, they fall prey to the Evil Genius Doubt. Further reading: For important passages in Descartes’ handling of the cogito, see the second and third sets of Objections and Replies. In the secondary literature, see Beyssade (1993), Broughton (2002), Carriero (2009), Cunning (2007), Curley (1978), Frankfurt (1966), Hintikka (1962), Kenny (1968), Markie (1992), Peacocke (2012), Sarkar (2003), Stroud (2008), Vendler (1984), Vinci (1998), Williams (1978), and Wilson (1978).