 Descartes holds that our judgments about our own minds are epistemically better-off than our judgments about bodies. In our natural, pre-reflective condition, however, we’re apt to confuse the sensory images of bodies with the external things themselves, a confusion leading us to think our judgments about bodies are epistemically impressive. The confusion is clearly expressed (Descartes would say) in G. E. Moore’s famous claim to knowledge – “Here is a hand” – along with his more general defense of common sense: In contrast, Descartes writes: Methodical doubt is intended to help us appreciate the folly of the commonsensical position – helping us recognize that perception of our own minds is “not simply prior to and more certain … but also more evident” than perception of our own bodies (Prin. 1:11, AT 8a:8, CSM 1:196). “Disagreement on this point,” writes Descartes, comes from “those who have not done their philosophizing in an orderly way”; from those who, while properly acknowledging the “certainty of their own existence,” mistakenly “take ‘themselves’ to mean only their bodies” – failing to “realize that they should have taken ‘themselves’ in this context to mean their minds alone” (Prin. 1:12, AT 8a:9, CSM 1:196). In epistemological contexts, Descartes underwrites the mind-better-known-than-body doctrine with methodical doubt. For example, while reflecting on his epistemic position in regards both to himself, and to the wax, the Second Meditation meditator says: Other reasons may motivate Descartes as well. He may take the doctrine to be closely allied to a representational theory of sense perception. Accordingly, our sense organs and nerves serve as literal mediating links in the causal chain generating perception: they stand between (both spatially and causally) external things themselves, and the brain events occasioning our perceptual awareness (cf. Prin. 4:196). In veridical sensation, the objects of immediate sensory awareness are not external bodies themselves, nor are we immediately aware of the states of our sense organs or nerves. Rather, the objects of immediate awareness are – whether in veridical sensation, or in dreams – the mind’s own ideas. Descartes indeed holds that the fact of physiological mediation helps explain delusional ideas, because roughly the same kinds of physiological processes that produce waking ideas are employed in producing delusional ideas: Various passages of the Meditations lay important groundwork for this theory of perception. For instance, one of the messages of the wax passage is that sensory awareness does not reach to external things themselves: Descartes thinks we’re apt to be “tricked by ordinary ways of talking” (ibid.). In ordinary contexts we don’t say that it seems there are men outside the window; we say that we see them. Nor, in such contexts, are our beliefs about those men apt to result from conscious, inferentially complex judgments, say, like this one: “Well, I appear to be awake, and the window pane looks clean, and there’s plenty of light outside, and so on, and I thus conclude that I am seeing men outside the window.” Even so, our ordinary ways of speaking and thinking often mislead. Descartes’ view is that the mind’s immediate perception does not, strictly speaking, extend beyond itself, to external bodies. This is an important basis of the mind-better-known-than-body doctrine. In the concluding paragraph of the Second Meditation, Descartes writes: The understanding of ideas as the only immediate objects of awareness arises in a number of texts. In the Sixth Meditation, while discussing sense perception and our ideas of external things, Descartes writes that the mind’s sensation extends strictly and immediately only to the ideas: “the ideas were, strictly speaking, the only immediate objects of my sensory awareness [solas proprie et immediate sentiebam]” (AT 7:75, CSM 2:52). In the Second Replies, Descartes defines thought “to include everything that is within us in such a way that we are immediately aware of it”; while defining idea in terms of the “immediate perception” that makes us “aware of the thought” (AT 7:160, CSM 2:113). And in the Third Replies he writes: “I make it quite clear in several places … that I am taking the word ‘idea’ to refer to whatever is immediately perceived by the mind” (AT 7:181, CSM 2:127). Complicating an understanding of such passages is that Descartes scholarship is divided on whether to attribute to him some version of an indirect theory of perception, or instead some version of a direct theory. According to indirect perception accounts, in normal sensation the mind’s perception of bodies is mediated by an awareness of its ideas of those bodies. By contrast, direct perception interpretations allow that in normal sensation the mind’s ideas play a mediating role, though this role doesn’t have ideas functioning as items of awareness; rather, the objects of direct awareness are the external things, themselves. On both accounts, ideas mediate our perception of external objects. On direct theory accounts, the mediating role is only a process role. By analogy, various brain processes mediate our perception of external objects, but in the normal course of perception we are not consciously aware of those processes; and likewise for the mind’s ideas, according to direct perception accounts. On one recent version of an indirect perception interpretation, sensory ideas mediate our perception of the external bodies they’re of, in much the same way that pictures (or other representational media) mediate our perception of what they portray (Newman 2009). More generally, Descartes seems to view all ideas as mental pictures, of a sort. As he writes: “the term ‘idea’ is strictly appropriate” only for thoughts that “are as it were the images of things” (Med. 3, AT 7:37, CSM 2:25); he adds that “the ideas in me are like {pictures, or} images” (Med. 3, AT 7:42, CSM 2:29). Indirect perception interpretations have figured prominently in the history of Descartes scholarship. A number of recent commentators, however, have challenged this traditional view. For example, John Carriero’s recent book on Descartes defends a direct perception interpretation: “I don’t read Descartes as holding that I am (immediately) aware only of my sensory ideas and only subsequently (and perhaps indirectly) aware of bodies or their qualities” (2009, 25). Thus on Carriero’s reading, Descartes’ broader argument rebutting our doubts about the external world is not to be understood as an effort to get on the other side (as it were) of our ideas: We have seen that the proper use of our cognitive faculties requires us to withhold assent except when our perception is clear and distinct – that forming judgments in accord with the C&D Rule provides the only guarantee of truth. Let’s apply this to introspective judgments. Suppose that the present contents of my mind include a confused array of ideas – say, a confused assemblage of auditory ideas, or color ideas, or perhaps I am presently flooded with a confused assortment of ideas of emotion. In such cases, the proper use of my faculties requires me to withhold judgment about the present state of my mind. It is surprising, therefore, to learn that on the standard view among scholars, Descartes holds a strong view of privileged access guaranteeing the truth of all introspective judgments about the present contents of our own minds. On the standard view, Descartes holds an infallibility thesis whereby judgments about our own mental states cannot be mistaken, if based on introspective awareness: if I seem to be in mental state x, then I am in x. (A variety of related doctrines are also attributed to him, including the indubitability of the mental – roughly, that introspective judgments are indubitable; and omniscience with respect to the mental – roughly, that one has knowledge of every true proposition about one’s own present contents of consciousness. There is some variation in the way these doctrines are formulated in the literature.) At least two lines of argument are widely cited in support of this standard interpretation. One draws on the transparency doctrine. The other draws on texts claimed to provide support. Let’s examine both. The transparency doctrine has it that we are aware of everything occurring in our minds – this, a result of Descartes’ view that thinking constitutes the whole essence of mind: Add to this that, unlike with external sensation, there is no introspective appearance/reality gap, and there can seem to be no room for introspective errors. Zeno Vendler explains: Kenny adds: Those who question the interpretation are apt to note that from the fact that I have awareness of whatever is occurring in my mind, it does not follow that I have distinct awareness. If what’s occurring in my mind is a confused muddle of ideas, then I’ll be aware of a confused muddle of ideas. But in that case, forming a judgment about the present state of my mind is a recipe for error – i.e., given the Fourth Meditation account of proper judgment. Because simpler ideas are generally easier to render clear and distinct, it can perhaps seem that I enjoy introspective infallibility concerning them. For example, while looking at a clear blue sky, it may seem unmistakable that I’m presently having an idea of blue. But suppose that while looking at multicolored sunset, I form an introspective judgment about precisely which color ideas are occurring in my mind. Must Descartes say that such judgments are infallible? Noteworthy is that he writes, of “sensations, emotions and appetites,” that “we are frequently wrong in our judgements concerning them”; adding, that we can avoid such errors “provided we take great care in our judgements concerning them to include no more than what is strictly contained in our perception – no more than that of which we have inner awareness” (Prin 1:66, AT 8a:32, CSM 1:216). Consider another case that’s at odds with the standard interpretation. Were Descartes committed to introspective infallibility, then he should say that we could never be mistaken as to whether our occurring ideas are ideas of sensation, or instead ideas of imagination occurring in a dream. Yet as we’ve seen, he takes dreaming-based scepticism utterly seriously. What about the textual line of argument regularly cited in support of the standard interpretation? Consider two Meditations passages that can seem to entail the infallibility thesis. I certainly seem to see, to hear, and to be warmed. This cannot be false; what is called “having a sensory perception” is strictly just this, and in this restricted sense of the term it is simply thinking. (Med. 2, AT 7:29, CSM 2:19) Now as far as ideas are concerned, provided they are considered solely in themselves and I do not refer them to anything else, they cannot strictly speaking be false; for whether it is a goat or a chimera that I am imagining, it is just as true that I imagine the former as the latter. As for the will and the emotions, here too one need not worry about falsity; for even if the things which I may desire are wicked or even non-existent, that does not make it any less true that I desire them. (Med. 3, AT 7:37, CSM 2:26) Prima facie, it is plausible to take such passages to entail that if if I seem to be having an idea of blue, or an idea of a noise, or of warmth, etc., then I am. Indeed, one might take such passages to convey that judgments to this effect “cannot be false” because introspective judgments are infallible. But note the continuation of the second passage: “Thus the only remaining thoughts where I must be on my guard against making a mistake are judgements.” That is, these passages can be read in a very different. Accordingly, a mere seeming “cannot be false” because it is not the kind of mental state that could be false; on Descartes’ view, falsity arises not simply from the mind’s awareness of its ideas, but from judgments – i.e., from acts of will assenting to those items of awareness. Read in this way, these passages anticipate the Fourth Meditation theory of judgment: Arguably, Descartes’ mind-better-known-than-body doctrine is intended as a comparative rather than a superlative thesis. We have seen that, for Descartes, the only superlative perceptual state is that of clarity and distinctness. The only guarantee of truth in our introspective judgments is, like all other judgments, when they are based on clear and distinct perception: if I clearly and distinctly perceive myself to be in mental state x, then I am in x. Further reading: On Descartes’ theory of ideas, see Carriero (2009), Chappell (1986), Hoffman (1996), Jolley (1990), Nadler (2006), Nelson (1997), Newman (2009 and 2011), and Smith (2014). On Descartes’ doctrine that the mind is better known than the body, see Jolley (2013), LoLordo (2005), and Nolan and Whipple (2005). On the infallibility thesis, see Alanen (2003), Broughton (2008), Curley (2006), Kenny (1968), McRae (1972), Vendler (1972), Wilson (1978).