 It seems that all three components of Russell’s analysis face serious challenges. At this point, is there anything left to salvage? At the beginning of this article I noted that some uses of the expressions ‘an F’ and ‘the F’ are argued to be predicational, rather than quantificational. So, for example, consider the following cases. (60) John is a lawyer. (61) John is the mayor of Pittsburgh. It is not unusual to think of ‘is a lawyer’ and ‘is the mayor of Pittsburgh’ as predicates. In the case of (60), we intuitively are not saying that there is a lawyer such that John is identical to that lawyer. Indeed, as Williams (1983) observed, this appearance is even more pronounced if we consider cases like (62). (62) does not seem to have the meaning that there is a lawyer such that John is not identical to that lawyer. It is more natural to take an utterance of (62) as denying that John has a certain property. If this is right, then the copula ‘is’ is really just the ‘is’ of predication and semantically dispensable (significantly, it routinely does not appear in many other languages unless it is needed to carry tense or other inflectional information). Likewise, we might say that the indefinite article ‘a’ is semantically inert as well—a mere “grace note” in Higginbotham’s (1987) terminology. In this vein, one widely held view, due to Kamp (1981) and Heim (1982), is that we could regard indefinite descriptions as expressions containing free variables which are bound by adverbs of quantification (in the sense of Lewis (1975)) interpreted as existentially quantified by the model theory, or perhaps bound by implicit existential closure operators (Diesing 1992). For linguists it is now standard to think of indefinite descriptions following the copula as always being predicational, and it is a widespread belief that definite descriptions following the copula are often predicational. Philosophers have also been attracted to this view. See, for example, Geach (1962; section 39), Wiggins (1965, 42 ff.), Kim (1970; 211 ff.), Wilson (1978), Smiley (1981) and Higginbotham (1987) among others). Does it follow that we must admit two different kinds of descriptions (quantificational and predicational)? We saw that singular, plural, mass, and generic descriptions can be unified; can we perform the same unification trick here? Fara (2001) pursued the possibility that all uses of definite descriptions are predicational—even descriptions in subject position. The idea is that if I say ‘The present King of France is bald’, I am saying something like the following: some x is such that x is the unique present king of France and x is bald. The interesting riff here is the notion that the uniqueness condition is built into the predicate. Extending the Sharvy (1980) analysis of plural descriptions, we get the following, where F is the set of all Fs, or the mass of all substance that is F (the vertical strokes before ad after and after the expression indicate that we are talking about the semantic value, or meaning, of the bordered expression): But again we might consider collapsing the distinction between definite and indefinite descriptions here, and say that there is a single rule that interprets all descriptions—definite, indefinite, singular, plural, mass, or generic—as predicates. When we supplement this with the rejection of the uniqueness/maximality clause we get this result: If this is right then the determiners ‘a’ and ‘the’ are both “grace notes” not just in special positions, but across the board. What then are we to say about the determiners ‘the’ and ‘a’? Determiners are rare in the world’s languages and are not universally employed in many Indo-European languages (for example they are not found in Slavic languages, with the exception of southern Slavic languages like Bulgarian). And (as we saw above) even in languages that deploy determiners, it is not clear that the determiners are behaving as quantificational operators. One interesting fact to observe here, is that as noted by Hewson (1972; 66–67) languages with articles and languages with robust case morphology are typically in complementary distribution.  Indeed, as languages evolve, their robust inflectional system gives way to structure dependent language (Leiss (2000)).  It is when the case system weakens that determiners begin to appear––an idea that is offered in Abraham (1997:29), Philippi (1997:63–64), Selig (1992), Ivančev 1988:105, and (Mayer 1988: 112).  As Mladenova (2007) puts it, “the morphology of the definite article makes it possible to perpetuate case distinctions long after they have been obliterated elsewhere.” (But see also Mladenova for subtleties in applying this idea to Bulgarian.)  Could it be then that determiners serve the purpose of case marking? This question calls for an ambitious empirical research program, but we can already see hints of an analysis. For example, it is plausible to think that one central function of the definite determiner is to provide genitive case when needed.  In some cases this would yield a possessive meaning. Consider the following examples. (64)  The car went in the ditch. (65)  I was such a terrible bowler that the ball went in the gutter. (66)  The car needs gas. (67)  The doctor told me to stop eating red meat. It is easy to hear all of these examples as involving an implicit possessive operator. (64′)  The car went in the road’s ditch. (65′)  I was such a terrible bowler that my ball went in my lane’s gutter. (66′)  Our car needs gas. (67′)  My doctor told me to stop eating red meat. Example (65) is particularly instructive in this regard. If I am an exceptionally terrible bowler I might toss the ball into the gutter of someone else’s lane. In this case I might be more apt to say “The ball went in a gutter”; saying that it went in the gutter doesn’t quite seem to do justice to my failure as a bowler. That is because when I say the ball went in the gutter it suggests that it at least ended up in my gutter. The claim, however, is not that the definite determiner is functioning as a possessive. The hypothesis is that it is functioning as a multi-purpose case marker, and when it is marking for genitive case, possessive meaning is one possible outcome.  But genitive case can be put to other uses. For example, species names are routinely given in the genitive case in Latin, and indeed it is a prescriptive rule about the coining of a new species name that it be placed in genitive case.  The underlying deep motivation is presumably that species are part of a genus, so that when one expresses a species name it is shorthand for a more complete description.  So, for example, when we say ‘The tiger’, we are offering up an abbreviation of something like ‘tiger, species of genus panthera’ (or more accurately, ‘panthera tigris, of genus panther’).  One might here argue that this is a partitive construction, but more explicit possessive constructions are possible: ‘species panthera tigris, belonging to the genus panthera’. This genitive case analysis perhaps sheds light on what is going on in the array of facts offered by Abbott and Horn.  Consider (46) again.   (46) So Lufthansa is a—or even the—German airline.   As observed earlier, (46) can be asserted even if there is more than one German airline.  One intriguing possibility here is that the stress is creating what is known as a superlative genitive, an example from Latin being sanctum sanctorum (holy of holies).  In the case of (46), for example, we are saying Lufthansa is the most German airline of German airlines.  This story would require a story involving some movement and copying of the noun within the determiner phrase, but such a story would not be unheard of in contemporary work on the structure of determiner phrases (see Larson (2014)).  What is also intriguing about this line of inquiry is that it suggests a new strategy for accounting for definiteness.  It is not pragmatically extruded from givenness (as suggested by Ludlow and Segal) but rather from whatever meaning the genetive case brings with it – often some notion of possession.  For example, an appearance of a description of the form ‘the dog’ in a sentence might indicate something like ‘dog of the event’ or ‘dog bearing some thematic role to the event’.  From this bit of information, the pragmatics might allow us infer that there is a unique dog. It would not be fruitful to suggest that definite determiners always play the role of case assignment, and they most certainly cannot be cashed out as exclusively assigning genitive case. The prospects for a unified explanation for determiner behavior seems remote. The evidence does suggest however, that definite determiners can often play the role of supplying case, and this may go a long way towards explaining some of the most recalcitrant facts involving descriptions. (46) So Lufthansa is a—or even the—German airline. As observed earlier, (46) can be asserted even if there is more than one German airline.  One intriguing possibility here is that the stress is creating what is known as a superlative genitive, an example from Latin being sanctum sanctorum (holy of holies).  In the case of (46), for example, we are saying Lufthansa is the most German airline of German airlines.  This story would require a story involving some movement and copying of the noun within the determiner phrase, but such a story would not be unheard of in contemporary work on the structure of determiner phrases (see Larson (2014)). What is also intriguing about this line of inquiry is that it suggests a new strategy for accounting for definiteness.  It is not pragmatically extruded from givenness (as suggested by Ludlow and Segal) but rather from whatever meaning the genetive case brings with it – often some notion of possession.  For example, an appearance of a description of the form ‘the dog’ in a sentence might indicate something like ‘dog of the event’ or ‘dog bearing some thematic role to the event’.  From this bit of information, the pragmatics might allow us infer that there is a unique dog. It would not be fruitful to suggest that definite determiners always play the role of case assignment, and they most certainly cannot be cashed out as exclusively assigning genitive case. The prospects for a unified explanation for determiner behavior seems remote. The evidence does suggest however, that definite determiners can often play the role of supplying case, and this may go a long way towards explaining some of the most recalcitrant facts involving descriptions.