 In Davidson’s work the question ‘what is meaning?’ is replaced by the question ‘What would a speaker need to know to understand the utterances of another?’ The result is an account that treats the theory of meaning as necessarily part of a much broader theory of interpretation and, indeed, of a much broader approach to the mental as such. This account is holistic inasmuch as it requires that any adequate theory must address linguistic and non-linguistic behaviour in its entirety. As we have already seen, this means that a theory of interpretation must adopt a compositional approach to the analysis of meaning; it must recognise the interconnected character of attitudes and of attitudes and behaviour; and it must also attribute attitudes and interpret behaviour in a way constrained by normative principles of rationality. Rationality is not, however, the only principle on which Davidson’s account of radical interpretation depends. It involves, in fact, a marriage of both holistic and ‘externalist’ considerations: considerations concerning the dependence of attitudinal content on the rational connections between attitudes (‘holism’) and concerning the dependence of such content on the causal connections between attitudes and objects in the world (‘externalism’). Indeed, this marriage is evident, as we saw earlier, in the principle of charity itself and its combination of considerations of both ‘coherence’ and ‘correspondence’. Davidson holds, in fact, that attitudes can be attributed, and so attitudinal content determined, only on the basis of a triangular structure that requires interaction between at least two creatures as well as interaction between each creature and a set of common objects in the world. Identifying the content of attitudes is a matter of identifying the objects of those attitudes, and, in the most basic cases, the objects of attitudes are identical with the causes of those same attitudes (as the cause of my belief that there is a bird outside my window is the bird outside my window). Identifying beliefs involves a process analogous to that of ‘triangulation’ (as employed in topographical surveying and in the fixing of location) whereby the position of an object (or some location or topographical feature) is determined by taking a line from each of two already known locations to the object in question – the intersection of the lines fixes the position of the object (this idea first appears in ‘Rational Animals [1982]). Similarly, the objects of propositional attitudes are fixed by looking to find objects that are the common causes, and so the common objects, of the attitudes of two or more speakers who are capable of observing and responding to one another’s behaviour. In ‘Three Varieties of Knowledge’, Davidson develops the idea of triangulation as a means to elaborate the three-way conceptual interdependence that he argues obtains between knowledge of oneself, knowledge of others and knowledge of the world. Just as knowledge of language cannot be separated from our more general knowledge of the world, so Davidson argues that knowledge of oneself, knowledge of other persons and knowledge of a common, ‘objective’ world form an interdependent set of concepts no one of which is possible in the absence of the others. The idea of triangulation has important implications that go far beyond questions of knowledge alone, and the idea is one of the most important and enduring, but also controversial elements in Davidson’s later thinking (see Myers and Verheggen, 2016). Moreover, although the idea may appear at first sight to be intended purely as a metaphor, the structure of triangulation seems actually to direct attention to the way in which knowledge, action, and content are fundamentally dependent on the genuinely embodied and located character of speakers and agents. As Davidson presents matters, it is only through their concrete engagement in the world, in relation both to objects and to other speakers or agents, that any speaker or agent can be capable of genuine speaking or agency - that any speaker or agent can be such that they can have thoughts or be capable of action. The emphasis on the holistic and externalist character of knowledge and of content that is so central to triangulation is also expressed in Davidson’s well-known ‘Swampman’ example (in ‘Knowing One’s own Mind’, Davidson 1987: 443–4) Here we are asked to imagine a situation in which a lightning strike in a swamp reduces Davidson’s body to its basic elements, while simultaneously transforming a nearby dead tree into an exact replica of him. Although the resulting ‘Swampman’ behaves exactly like the original author of ‘Radical Interpretation’, Davidson denies that the ‘Swampman’ could properly be said to have thoughts or its words have meaning – and the reason is simply that the Swampman would lack the sort of causal history that is required in order to establish the right connections between itself, others and the world that underpin the attribution of thought and meaning. For all its notoriety, however, the Swampman example is not elaborated upon by Davidson, and the example has a very limited usefulness. In this respect, the attention Swampman has generated is quite disproportionate to his extremely brief appearance in Davidson’s writing. Although it is not simply an epistemological notion, the way Davidson presents the idea of triangulation tends to be such as to bring its epistemological implications to the fore. This is especially true of the way Davidson develops the idea in ‘Three Varieties of Knowledge’. Since our knowledge of our own minds is not independent of our knowledge of the world nor of our knowledge of others, so we cannot treat self-knowledge as a matter of our having access to some set of private ‘mental’ objects. Our knowledge of ourselves arises only in relation to our involvement with others and with respect to a publically accessible world – as well as a history of such involvement (this is indeed part of the point of the Swampman example). Even so, we retain a certain authority over our own attitudes and utterances simply in virtue of the fact that those attitudes and utterances are indeed our own (see ‘First-Person Authority’, [1984]). Moreover, because our knowledge of the world is inseparable from other forms of knowledge, global epistemological scepticism – the view that all or most of our beliefs about the world could be false – turns out to be committed to much more than is usually supposed. Should it indeed turn out that our beliefs about the world were all, or for the most part, false, then this would not only imply the falsity of most of our beliefs about others, but it would also have the peculiar consequence of making false most of our beliefs about ourselves – including the supposition that we do indeed hold those particular false beliefs. Although this may fall short of demonstrating the falsity of such scepticism, it surely demonstrates it to be deeply problematic. The way in which the Davidsonian rejection of scepticism does indeed derive quite directly from Davidson’s adoption of a holistic, externalist approach to knowledge, and to attitudinal content in general, has sometimes been obscured by Davidson’s presentation of his argument against scepticism through the employment (for the first time in ‘Thought and Talk’[1975]) of the rather problematic notion of an ‘omniscient interpreter’. Such an interpreter would attribute beliefs to others and assign meanings to their utterances, but would nevertheless do so on the basis of his own, true, beliefs. The omniscient interpreter would therefore have to find a large amount of agreement between his own beliefs and the beliefs of those he interprets – and what was agreed would also, by hypothesis, be true. Like the Swampman example, however, the omniscient interpreter example has given rise to a number of complications and misunderstandings (so much so that Davidson has expressed regret at ever having deployed those examples in the first place) – and although the omniscient interpreter appears at a number of places in Davidson’s writings, the idea does not appear in his later discussions, but is instead replaced by the notion of triangulation. A feature of both the triangulation argument, and the Davidsonian account of radical interpretation, is that the attribution of attitudes must always proceed in tandem with the interpretation of utterances – identifying content, whether of utterances or of attitudes, is indeed a single project. An inability to interpret utterances (that is, an inability to assign meanings to instances of putative linguistic behaviour) will thereby imply an inability to attribute attitudes (and vice versa). A creature that we cannot interpret as capable of meaningful speech will thus also be a creature that we cannot interpret as capable of possessing contentful attitudes. Such considerations lead Davidson to deny that non-linguistic animals are capable of thought – where thought involves the possession of propositional attitudes such as beliefs or desires (see especially ‘Thought and Talk’). This does not mean that such animals have no mental life at all, nor does it mean that we cannot usefully use mental concepts in explaining and predicting the behaviour of such creatures. What it does mean, however, is that the extent to which we can think of such creatures as having attitudes and a mental life like our own is measured by the extent to which we can assign determinate propositional content to the attitudes we would ascribe to those creatures. A further consequence of this view is that the idea of an untranslatable language – an idea often found in association with the thesis of conceptual relativism – cannot be given any coherent formulation. Inability to translate counts as evidence, not of the existence of an untranslatable language, but of the absence of a language of any sort (see ‘On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme’ [1974]) Davidson’s rejection of the idea of an untranslatable language (and the associated idea, also common to many forms of conceptual relativism, of a radically different, and so ‘incommensurable’ system of belief) is part of a more general argument that he advances (notably in ‘On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme’) against the so-called ‘third dogma’ of empiricism. The first two dogmas are those famously identified by Quine in ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’ (first published in the Philosophical Review, in 1951). The first is that of reductionism (the idea that, for any meaningful statement, it can be recast in the language of pure sensory experience, or, at least, in terms of a set of confirmatory instances), while the second is the analytic-synthetic distinction (the idea that, with respect to all meaningful statements, one can distinguish between statements that are true in virtue of their meaning and those that are true in virtue of both their meanings and some fact or facts about the world). The rejection of both these dogmas can be seen as an important element throughout Davidson’s thinking. The third dogma, which Davidson claims can still be discerned in Quine’s work (and so can survive the rejection even of the analytic-synthetic distinction), consists in the idea that one can distinguish within knowledge or experience between a conceptual component (the ‘conceptual scheme’) and an empirical component (the ‘empirical content’) – the former is often taken to derive from language and the later from experience, nature or some form of ‘sensory input’. While there are difficulties in even arriving at a clear formulation of this distinction (particularly so far as the nature of the relation between the two components is concerned), such a distinction depends on being able to distinguish, at some basic level, between a ‘subjective’ contribution to knowledge that comes from ourselves and an ‘objective’ contribution that comes from the world. What the Davidsonian account of knowledge and interpretation demonstrates, however, is that no such distinction can be drawn. Attitudes are already interconnected – causally, semantically and epistemically – with objects and events in the world; while knowledge of self and others already presupposes knowledge of the world. The very idea of a conceptual scheme is thus rejected by Davidson along with the idea of any strong form of conceptual relativism. To possess attitudes and be capable of speech is already to be capable of interpreting others and to be open to interpretation by them. Davidson emphasizes the holistic character of the mental (both in terms of the interdependence that obtains between various forms of knowledge as well as the interconnected character of attitudes and of attitudes and behaviour). He has, at times, also referred to his position as involving a ‘coherence’ theory of truth and of knowledge (in ‘A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge’ [1983]). Nevertheless, Davidson is not a coherentist, in any standard sense, about either truth or knowledge. Nor, for all that he adopts a Tarskian approach to meaning, does he espouse a correspondence theory of truth (in fact, he denies that a Tarskian truth theory is a correspondence theory in any conventional sense). In general, Davidson eschews the attempt to provide an account of the nature of truth, maintaining that truth is an absolutely central concept that cannot be reduced to or replaced by any other notion (see [Davidson 1990a] and [Davidson 2005b]). Since he takes truth to belong to sentences or statements, and not to ‘propositions’ in any philosophically significant sense (in Truth and Predication [2005b], he is particularly emphatic in rejecting the idea of the proposition as a theoretical or explanatory concept), Davidson denies that truths can be understood as timeless or eternal (or at least they are no more so than are languages or sentences themselves). The only way of defining truth, as Davidson sees it, is by means of a Tarskian truth theory and such a theory is not a definition of truth in any unqualified sense, but only a definition of the truth predicate as it applies within a particular language. Davidson’s employment of the notion of coherence is best viewed, not as a way of understanding truth, but rather as reflecting his commitment to the fundamentally rational and holistic character of the mind. It also connects with Davidson’s rejection of those forms of epistemological foundationalism that would attempt to ground knowledge or belief in the sensory causes of belief – beliefs, as one might expect given Davidson’s holistic approach, can find evidential support only in other beliefs. Similarly, Davidson’s sometime employment of the notion of correspondence is best understood, not as providing, any direct elucidation of the nature of truth, but rather as deriving from his externalist commitment to the idea that the content of belief is dependent upon the worldly causes of belief. In ‘True to the Facts’ (1969b) Davidson does defend what he there presents as a form of correspondence theory of truth. However, not only does Davidson later relinquish the claim that his is a ‘correspondence’ view of truth (this is already evident in ‘The Structure and Content of Truth’ [1990a], much of the material from which was later incorporated into Truth and Predication [2005b]), but the account set out in ‘True to the Facts’ is, in any case, far removed from what is usually taken to be involved in any correspondence theory. The strategy that Davidson employs in relation to the concept of truth reflects a more general approach that runs throughout his thinking. Rather than trying to reduce key concepts, like truth, to something else, his tendency is to retain the primitive character of those concepts and instead to look to how they are worked out within the larger structure to which they belong (in this respect, Davidson is a moderate ‘deflationist’ about most of his key concepts). The strategy Davidson adopts in respect of truth is therefore much the same strategy as that which he adopts with respect to meaning (which should not surprise us given the role Tarski plays): meaning belongs primarily to sentences, it is not reducible to any other notion, and it is explicated only by reference to a larger linguistic structure. Moreover, this strategy is also one Davidson applies to the topic that occupies a large part of his last work – his inquiry into the problem of the problem of predication or of the unity of the proposition (2005b). How are we to elucidate the relation between a subject and that which is predicated of it in a standard predicative sentence such as ‘Socrates is mortal’? The problem, like the problem that arises when one tries to use the truth predicate reflexively, is that any attempt to explicate the predicative relation seems to give rise to circularity or regress. Davidson’s solution is to deny that predication can be explained by resort to any prior notion of propositionality. Instead Davidson takes predication as basic, irreducible, and able to be explicated only through the sort of structure that is revealed by a Tarski-style theory of meaning. The question of truth lies at the heart of the realist/anti-realist controversy that was once a major concern of many Anglo-American philosophers. Despite his insistence on the indispensability of an irreducibly basic concept of objective truth, and his rejection of both sceptical and relativist positions, Davidson has been variously assimilated, at different times and by different critics, to both the realist and the anti-realist camps. Yet realism and anti-realism are equally unsatisfactory from a Davidsonian point of view, since neither is compatible with the holistic and externalist character of knowledge and belief. Realism makes truth inaccessible (inasmuch as it admits the sceptical possibility that even our best-confirmed theories about the world could all be false), while anti-realism makes truth too epistemic (inasmuch as it rejects the idea of truth as objective). In this respect, and as he himself makes clear (see 1990a, 2005b), Davidson does not merely reject the specific premises that underlie the realist and anti-realist positions, but views the very dispute between them as essentially misconceived. This reflects a characteristic feature of Davidson’s thinking in general (and not just as it relates to realism and anti-realism), namely its resistance to any simple classification using the standard philosophical categories of the day.