 Even the objective spatio-temporal world, which represents a significant part of our everyday lifeworld, is constituted intersubjectively, says Husserl. (The same holds true for its spatio-temporal framework, consisting of objective time and space.) How so? Husserl starts (again, from a first-person viewpoint) from a “solipsistic” abstraction of the notion of a spatio-temporal object which differs from that notion in that it does not presuppose that any other subject can observe such an object from his (or her) own perspective. His question is what justifies us (i.e., each of us for him- or herself) in the assumption of an objective reality consisting of such objects, given only this “solipsistic” conception of a spatio-temporal thing (or event) as our starting point. On Husserl's view, “the crucial further step” in order to answer this question consists in disclosing the dimension that opens up when the epistemic justification, or “motivation”, of intersubjective experience, or empathy, is additionally taken into account and made explicit (Husserliana, vol. VII, p. 435). Roughly, his argument goes as follows. In order for me to be able to put myself into someone else's shoes and simulate his (or her) perspective upon his surrounding spatio-temporal world, I cannot but assume that this world coincides with my own, at least to a large extent; although the aspects under which the other subject represents the world must be different, as they depend on his own egocentric viewpoint. Hence, I must presuppose that the spatio-temporal objects forming my own world exist independently of my subjective perspective and the particular experiences I perform; they must, in other words, be conceived of as part of an objective reality. This result fits in well with—in fact, it serves to explain—Husserl's view, already stressed in Ideas, that perceptual objects are “transcendent” in that at any given moment they display an inexhaustive number of unperceived (and largely even unexpected) features, only some of which will become manifest—will be intuitively presented—in the further course of observation. However, according to Husserl this does not mean that the objective world thus constituted in intersubjective experience is to be regarded as completely independent of the aspects under which we represent the world. For on his view another condition for the possibility of intersubjective experience is precisely the assumption that by and large the other subject structures the world into objects in the same style I myself do. It is partly for this reason that Husserl can be said to adhere to a version of both “realism” and “idealism” at the same time. Another, related, reason is that Husserl's argument for realism is developed in a context in which he defends what he refers to as "transcendental idealism" (a terminological choice he would later regret; see Føllesdal 1990a, 128). During the years in which his transcendental phenomenology took shape, he developed a number of "proofs" of this position, most of which are based upon his conception of a "real possibility" regarding cognition or the acquisition of knowledge. By a "real possibility", Husserl understands a possibility that is such that "something—more or less— 'speaks in favour of it'" (Hua XX/1, p. 178). Real possibilities are, in other words, conceived of as more or less (rationally) motivated possibilities; and Husserl understands motivation in such a way that it is always someone who is motivated a certain way (cf. Hua IV, p. 222). This is why Husserl subscribes to the following dependency thesis: The real possibility to acquire (empirical) knowledge regarding a contingent object A (possible world, individual thing, state of affairs involving such thing; cf. Hua XXXVI, pp. 139f) "requires" an "epistemic subject", which "either experiences A, or acquires knowledge regarding A on the basis of experience, or else has the practical possibility (or the practical ability) to experience A and acquire knowledge regarding it" (Hua XXXVI, p. 139). Husserl also adheres to the following correlation thesis with regard to empirical reality and real epistemic possibility: If a contingent object A is real (really exists), then the real (as opposed to the merely logical) possibility obtains to acquire knowledge regarding A (cf. Hua XXXVI, p. 138, l. 35-36). From these two propositions—the dependency and the correlation thesis—he derives the conclusion that the existence of a contingent object A requires "the necessary co-existence of a subject either acquiring knowledge" regarding A "or having the ability to do so" (Hua XXXVI, pp. 139f). This is nothing but "[t]he thesis of transcendental idealism [...]: A nature without co-existing subjects of possible experience regarding it is unthinkable; possible subjects of experience are not enough" (Hua XXXVI, p. 156). Husserl seems to regard real possibilities as epistemic dispositions (habitualities), or abilities, that require an actual "substrate" (cf. Hua XXXVI, p. 139). At the same time, he stresses that "surely no human being and no animal" must exist in the actual world (adding that their non-existence would however already result in a "change of the world") (cf. Hua XXXVI, p. 121). One way to make sense of this would be to weaken the dependency thesis, and the requirement of an actual substrate, and to merely require what might be called real higher-order possibilities—possibilities for acquiring epistemic dispositions in counterfactual (or actual) cases where epistemic subjects would be co-existing—that may remain unactualized but could be actualized by someone properly taking into account a multitude of individual epistemic perspectives, by means of intersubjective experience. But even under this reconstruction there remains a sense in which the criteria of real possibility and reality constitution, and the corresponding structure of the real world, are dependent on a "pure Ego", on Husserl's view: What counts as a real possibility, or as epistemically justified, is dependent on the phenomenological subjects reflecting about such counterfactual cases in the methodological context of the transcendental reduction and the results they arrive at in this context.