 The difference that embodied cognition makes to the three issues we discussed in Section 4—the modularity of mind, the nature of mental representation, and nativism about the mind, remains a live issue of debate in the philosophy of mind and cognitive science. The same is true of the interpretation of the particular empirical results described in Section 5. We think that some of these disagreements both reflect and contribute to sharper divides over the significance of embodied cognitive science. We discuss four such issues in this concluding section, structuring our discussion around four corresponding questions: Our aim here is not to provide extensive answers to these questions, but to indicate briefly what our review of contemporary work on embodied cognition indicates about the issues that they raise. We take each in turn. Insofar as embodied cognitive science has its origins in a variety of dissatisfaction with traditional cognitive science, it has explored novel questions about cognition and generated results that have, in some cases, been unexpected. As we have seen in the previous section, embodied cognitive science continues to produce empirical research that is interesting, novel, and controversial. In this respect, embodied cognitive science is not simply (or chiefly) a philosophical mantra empty of empirical content, but a cluster of perspectives on cognition whose empirical orientation and rootedness cannot be questioned. But there is an alternative position that one might take on this question that is more circumspect about the empirical payoff of “embodied cognition”. While there is no doubt about the empirical “oomph” of embodied cognitive science, the extent to which this work either challenges traditional views or requires one or another of the determinate forms of the Embodiment Thesis that we articulated—Body as Constraint, Body as Distributor, and Body as Regulator—might be questioned. For example, Lawrence Shapiro (2011) has argued that the views of Lakoff and Johnson on metaphor, thought, and the body are fully compatible with central tenets of traditional cognitive science, such as the idea that cognition centrally involves computation over internal mental representations (see also Shapiro 2010). Robert Rupert (2009b) has argued more generally for compatibility between the empirical findings of embodied cognitive science and the core assumptions of traditional cognitive science. Likewise, Fred Adams (2010) has argued that one should distinguish between the empirical premise in arguments for the embodiment of cognition, and a requisite logical-metaphysical premise, and that the latter of these is seldom supported. (Adams focuses on Glenberg's work on meaning affordances (Glenberg and Kaschak 2002; see also Glenberg and Robertson 2000, Glenberg et al. 2005), but his claims are quite general). From this perspective, one should sift the empirical wheat of embodied cognitive science from the revolutionary, philosophical chaff that has characterized that movement from the outset. This issue, in turn, brings us to our next issue. For the most part, questioning whether embodied cognitive science delivers on the revolutionary front has proceeded not by drawing on general considerations—say, of the underdetermination of theory by data—but by a detailed consideration of particular empirical results (cf. Rupert 2009b: ch.11, however). By its nature, this kind of argument, which we endorse the need for, is time- and space-consuming, especially given the diversity of work that falls under the label “embodied cognition”. This is more so in the evaluation of this type of challenge to proponents of embodied cognition. Here we settle for making one general point about the state of the dialectic here, and state where we believe the burden of proof lies. Suppose that we simply grant the historical claim that the focus and orientation of traditional cognitive science has not taken cognition to be dependent, in any significant way, on the body. What does this imply about the explanatory power of traditional cognitive science vis-a-vis the Embodiment Thesis? Recall that we have analyzed the Embodiment Thesis in terms of three determinate theses about the nature of the dependence of cognition on the body, each with its own particular implications: Those seeking to resist the challenge that one or more of these views poses to traditional cognitive science have two primary options: to deny the truth of the corresponding thesis, or to reject the inference(s) from that thesis to claims about what traditional cognitive science can and cannot explain. Defenders of traditional cognitive science have considerable dialectical power available here, and they have made effective use of a familiar argumentative strategy in resisting the embodied cognition challenge: to grant that there is a weak or limited sense in which one or more of these particular embodiment thesis is correct, but argue that the inferential gap between such theses and the rejection of views such as computationalism and representationalism is not bridgeable (Adams 2010, Rupert 2009a, 2009b) a strategy that those critically sympathetic to embodied cognitive science have also made effective use of (e.g., Shapiro 2010, 2011). To this extent, the burden of proof currently lies squarely with proponents of embodied cognitive science who hold that the revolutionary promise of embodied cognition is real to show how those gaps can be bridged. One such putatively radical implication of embodied cognition is the Extended Mind Thesis, which says that an agent's mind and associated cognitive processing are neither skull-bound nor even body-bound, but extend into the agent's world. Unlike the Embodiment Thesis, this thesis arose via more explicitly philosophically-driven discussions—of functionalism (Harman 1988), of computationalism and individualism (R. Wilson 1994, 1995: ch.3–4), and of belief (Clark and Chalmers 1998). It thus bears a different kind of relationship to empirical work in cognitive science than does the idea of embodied cognition. Despite the legacies of these different histories, as we noted in Section 1, embodied cognition and extended cognition have recently come to be viewed as peas in the same pod, as variants of situated cognitive science. The first point to draw attention to is that nothing in any of the three determinate forms of the Embodiment Thesis entails the extended mind thesis. Thus, the view that cognition is embodied (in some specific sense: constrained, distributed, or regulated) is compatible with the denial of the view that cognition is extended. Expressed in terms of the Body as Distributor thesis, perhaps cognitive processing is distributed by the body across neural and non-neural resources, but all of the relevant non-neural resources are contained within the boundaries of the body. We believe that this is the position occupied by the core of the embodied cognitive science community. (For example, Barsalou's recent [2008] review paper on “grounded cognition”, which completely omits mention of any the large philosophical literature on extended cognition, is indicative of this state of affairs.) Second, many of the most influential defenses of the extended mind thesis appeal to considerations only tangentially related to the body—to computationalism and individualism (R. Wilson 1994), to distributed and group-level cognition (Hutchins 1995), to parity principles (Clark and Chalmers 1998), to realization (R. Wilson 2001, 2004: ch.5–6). For this reason, debate over those arguments and the extended view of the mind they putatively support have only recently become conjoined by advocates (R. Wilson 2010; A. Clark 2003, 2008) and critics (Adams and Aizawa 2008; Rupert 2009b) alike. This recent, joint consideration is of mutual benefit to discussions of both embodied and extended cognition. Thus, and third, despite their independence, some have claimed that the most powerful arguments for one of these views also provide strong reasons to accept the other. For example, Andy Clark (2008) argues from the active embodiment of cognition to the extended mind thesis. Similarly, some of the most trenchant objections to one of these views would also appear also to serve as the basis for rejecting the other. For example, critics of the extended mind thesis, such as Adams and Aizawa (2008) and Rupert (2004, 2009b), have objected that those arguing for the thesis have confused or elided the distinction between external causes of cognition and external constituents of cognition. This charge of committing a “coupling-constitution fallacy” is also readily made against particular embodied cognition views, such as Alva Nöe's (2004) view that perceptual experience is constituted by sensorimotor abilities (see Prinz 2009; Aizawa 2007; Rupert 2006; Block 2005). While there may be relevant differences between embodied and extended cognition that imply that such arguments and objections do not transfer, there are at least default, parity considerations that put the burden of proof on those claiming those differences. Fourth, there may be deeper reasons for thinking that embodied and extended cognition stand or fall together. Rupert (2009b), for example, has recently argued against both embodied and extended cognition in part by making a positive case for what he calls the cognitive systems view of the boundaries of cognition, and that this view suggests, together with our best empirical science, that cognition begins and ends in the brain. If Rupert is correct, then cognition is neither embodied nor extended because both views are incompatible with an independently-motivated account of the brain-bound nature of integrated cognitive architectures. Conversely, in laying out a general conception of situated cognition as cognitive extension, Wilson and Clark (2009) claimed that “many forms of embodied cognition, properly understood, will turn out to involve just the kinds of cognitive extension that we articulate here” (p.56), a promissory note that one of us (R. Wilson 2010) has attempted to cash in offering the following explicit argument tying together embodied and extended cognition: Clearly, as the premise that explicitly draws a connection between the Embodiment and Extended Mind theses, (4) is where this argument is likely to be scrutinized by those skeptical of the conclusion to this argument. Whether that can be done while accepting (1)–(3), however, is unclear and the kind of issue that requires further attention in this debate. If the mind is not skull-bound but at least embodied, and perhaps even extended, then what view should we adopt of the self, subjectivity, and consciousness? The penultimate paragraph to Clark and Chalmers (1998) advocated the view that, to put it colloquially, where mind goes, the self follows: if the mind is extended, for example, so too is the self (see also A. Clark 2001, 2003). Since much of what matters to the identity of one's self is cognitive in nature, at least on traditional views of the self and personal identity, this “self-follows-mind” view seems a natural default. If the boundaries of the self shift with those of the mind out from skull to body, or even from body to world, as the self-follows-mind view implies, then accepting embodied or extended cognition will have interesting implications concerning autonomy, sociality, personal identity, and responsibility. For example, it might be that in some cases interfering with someone's peripersonal space, the space close to the body, or even certain of one's belongings, will have a comparable moral significance as interfering with a person's body. And as Clark and Chalmers (1998) suggested in their final paragraph, certain forms of social activity might be reconceived as a kind of thought activity. The social distribution of human decision-making would also mitigate individual's responsibility for a transgression, thereby producing dramatic ramifications for our practices of attributing legal culpability. In effect, if situational forces and environmental contingences played a physically constitutive role in decision-making processes so as to become partial realizers of one's own behavior, as the so called ‘Frail Control Hypothesis’ seems to suggest (see Churchland and Suhler 2009 for critics to this view), then human beings would have little if any control over their actions and presumably no normative competence. Against the self-follows-mind view, Wilson (2004: 141-143) has argued that even if one accepts that the mind is extended, there are reasons to resist the idea that the self is likewise extended. This resistance turns on precisely the kinds of implications indicated above, and their often radical, deeply counter-intuitive, and puzzling consequences. For example, if subjects of cognition (or agents, or individuals) are themselves distributed across brain, body, and world, then why should we punish just one bit of this individual, the bit inside the body, when it commits a crime? (Consider this a truncated reductio.) More generally, while agents as the subjects of cognition are not just a bundle of neural circuits and bodily experience, re-casting agency and subjectivity within the extended framework likely requires a far more comprehensive and somewhat uneasy reconceptualization of notions such as normative competence, freedom and control, and personal identity. Perhaps this simply tells us that much further exploration is needed concerning how embodied experiences in real-world contexts shape cognitive processing. Or perhaps it suggests that more conservative strategies should be employed to account for what the subjects of cognitive processing really are. One such strategy is to appeal to the ready-made distinction between the subject or agent of cognition, which can be readily identified as being where the locus of control for a given cognitive system is, housed in the agent's body, and the cognitive systems in which cognitive processing is realized, which are often extended (R. Wilson 2004, ch.5–6). Such a distinction is put to antecedent use in making sense of extended biological systems, such as spiders and the webs they spin—these organisms are bounded, roughly speaking, by their cohesive, organic bodies, but still act in the world through the extended biological systems they construct (R. Wilson 2005, ch.1–4). Thus, an appeal to this distinction here is not ad hoc, and provides a principled basis for a more conservative, traditional view of agency and the self within an extended cognition framework.