 Much of modern epistemology aims to address one or another kind of skepticism. Skepticism is a challenge to our pre-philosophical conception of ourselves as cognitively successful beings. Such challenges come in many varieties. One way in which these varieties differ concerns the different kinds of cognitive success that they target: skepticism can challenge our claims to know, or our claims to believe justifiably, or our claims to have justification for believing, or our claims to have any good reasons for belief whatsoever. But another way in which these varieties differ is in whether the skepticism in question is fully general—targeting the possibility of enjoying any instance of the relevant cognitive success—or is selective—targeting the possibility of enjoying the relevant cognitive success concerning a particular subject matter (e.g., the past, the minds of others, the world beyond our own consciousness) or concerning beliefs formed by a particular method (e.g., perception, memory, reasoning, etc.). General skepticism and selective skepticism pose very different sorts of challenges, and use very different kinds of arguments. General skepticism is motivated by reasoning from some apparently conflicting features of the kind of cognitive success in question. For instance, a general skeptic might claim that justification requires a regress of justifiers, but then argue that this regress of justifiers cannot be contained in any finite mind—and thus, the skeptic might conclude, no finite being can be justified in believing anything. Alternatively a general skeptic might claim that knowledge requires certainty, and that nobody can be certain of something unless there is nothing of which she could be even more certain—thus, the skeptic might conclude, we can know virtually nothing (see Unger 1975). Selective skepticism, in contrast, is typically motivated by appeal to one or another skeptical hypothesis. A skeptical hypothesis is a hypothesis according to which the facts that you claim to know (whether these facts concern the past, or the mind of others, or the mind-independent world, or what have you) may, for all you can tell, be radically different from how they appear to you to be. Thus, a skeptical hypothesis is a hypothesis that distinguishes between the way things appear to you, on the one hand, and the way they really are, on the other; and this distinction is deployed in such a way as to pose a challenge to your cognitive success concerning the latter. Here are some famous examples of skeptical hypotheses: Skeptics can make use of such hypotheses in constructing various arguments that challenge our pre-philosophical picture of ourselves as cognitively successful. Consider, for instance, the BIV hypothesis, and some ways in which this hypothesis can be employed in a skeptical argument. Here is one way of doing so. According to the BIV hypothesis, the experiences you would have as a BIV and the experiences you have as a normal person are perfectly alike, indistinguishable, so to speak, “from the inside”. Thus, although it appears to you as if you are a normally embodied human being, everything would appear exactly the same way to a BIV. Thus, the way things appear to you cannot provide you with knowledge that you are not a BIV. But if the way things appear to you cannot provide you with such knowledge, then nothing can give you such knowledge, and so you cannot know that you’re not a BIV. Of course, you already know this much: if you are a BIV, then you don’t have any hands. If you don’t know that you’re not a BIV, then you don’t know that you’re not in a situation in which you don’t have any hands. But if you don’t know that you’re not in a situation in which you don’t have any hands, then you don’t know that you’re not handless. And to not know that you’re not handless is simply to not know that you have hands. We can summarize this skeptical argument as follows: The BIV-Knowledge Closure Argument (BKCA) Therefore: As we have just seen, (C1) and (C2) are very plausible premises. It would seem, therefore, that BKCA is sound. If it is, we must conclude we don’t know we have hands. But surely that conclusion can’t be right: if it turns out that I don’t know that I have hands, that must be because of something very peculiar about my cognitive relation to the issue of whether I have hands—not because of the completely anodyne considerations mentioned in BKCA. So we are confronted with a difficult challenge: The conclusion of the BKCA seems plainly false, but on what grounds can we reject  it?[61] Here are some other ways of using the BIV hypothesis to generate a skeptical argument. The BIV-Justification Underdetermination Argument (BJUA) Therefore: The BIV-Knowledge Defeasibility Argument (BKDA) Therefore: Therefore: The BIV-Epistemic Possibility Argument (BEPA) Therefore: Obviously, this list of skeptical arguments could be extended by varying either (a) the skeptical hypothesis employed, or (b) the kind of cognitive success being challenged, or (c) the epistemological principles that link the hypothesis in (a) and the challenge in (b). Some of the resulting skeptical arguments are more plausible than others, and some are historically more prominent than others, but there isn’t space for a comprehensive survey. Here, we will review some of the more influential replies to BKCA, BJUA, BKDA, and BEPA. Next, we will examine various responses to the  BKCA  argument. According to the first, we can see that  (C2)  is false if we distinguish between relevant and irrelevant alternatives. An alternative to a proposition p is any proposition that is incompatible with p. Your having hands and your being a BIV are alternatives: if the former is true, the latter is false, and vice versa. According to the thought that motivates the second premise of the BIV argument, you know that you have hands only if you can discriminate between your actually having hands and the alternative of being a (handless) BIV. But, by hypothesis, you can’t discriminate between these. That’s why you don’t know that you have hands. In response to such reasoning, a relevant alternatives theorist would say that your inability to discriminate between these two is not an obstacle to your knowing that you have hands, and that’s because your being a BIV is not a relevant alternative to your having hands. What would be a relevant alternative? This, for example: your arms ending in stumps rather than hands, or your having hooks instead of hands, or your having prosthetic hands. But these alternatives don’t prevent you from knowing that you have hands—not because they are irrelevant, but rather because you can discriminate between these alternatives and your having hands. The relevant alternative theorist holds, therefore, that you do know that you have hands: you know it because you can discriminate it from relevant alternatives, like your having stumps rather than hands. Thus, according to Relevant Alternatives theorists, you know that you have hands even though you don’t know that you are not a BIV. There are two chief problems for this approach. The first is that denouncing the BIV alternative as irrelevant is ad hoc unless it is supplemented with a principled account of what makes one alternative relevant and another irrelevant. The second is that premise 2 is highly plausible. To deny it is to allow that the following conjunction can be true: Abominable Conjunction  I know that I have hands but I do not know that I am not a (handless) BIV. Many epistemologists would agree that this conjunction is indeed abominable because it blatantly violates the basic and extremely plausible intuition that you can’t know you have hands without knowing that you are not a  BIV.[62] Next, let us consider a response to BKCA according to which it’s not the second but the first premise that must be rejected. G. E. Moore has pointed out that an argument succeeds only to the extent that its premises are more plausible than the conclusion. So if we encounter an argument whose conclusion we find much more implausible than the denial of the premises, then we can turn the argument on its head. According to this approach, we can respond to the BIV argument as follows: Counter BIV Therefore: Unless we are skeptics or opponents of closure, we would have to concede that this argument is sound. It is valid, and its premises are true. Yet few philosophers would agree that Counter BIV amounts to a satisfying response to the BIV argument. It fails to explain how one can know that one is not a BIV. The observation that the premises of the BIV argument are less plausible than the denial of its conclusion doesn’t help us understand how such knowledge is possible. That’s why the Moorean response, unsupplemented with an account of how one can know that one is not a BIV, is widely thought to be an unsuccessful rebuttal of  BKCA.[63] We have looked at two responses to BKCA. The relevant alternatives response implausibly denies the second premise. The Moorean response denies the first premise without explaining how we could possibly have the knowledge that the first premise claims we don’t have. Another prominent response, contextualism, avoids both of these objections. According to the contextualist, the precise contribution that the verb “to know” makes to the truth-conditions of the sentences in which it occurs varies from one context to another: in contexts in which the BIV hypothesis is under discussion, an agent counts as “knowing” a fact only if she can satisfy some extremely high (typically unachievable) epistemic feat, and this is why (1) is true. But in contexts in which the BIV hypothesis is not under discussion, an agent can count as “knowing” a fact even if her epistemic position vis-à-vis that fact is much more modest, and this is why (3), taken in isolation, appears false. The contextualist literature has grown vastly over the past two decades: different contextualists have different accounts of how features of context affect the meaning of some occurrence of the verb “to know”, and each proposal has encountered specific challenges concerning the semantic mechanisms that it posits, and the extent to which it explains the whole range of facts about which epistemic claims are plausible under which  conditions.[64] Both the contextualist and the Moorean responses to  BKCA,  as discussed in the previous section, leave out one important detail. Both say that one can know that one isn’t a BIV (though contextualists grant this point only for the sense of “know” operational in low-standards contexts), but neither view explains how one can know such a thing. If, by hypothesis, a BIV has all the same states of mind that I have—including all the same perceptual experiences—then how can I be justified in believing that I’m not a BIV? And if I can’t be justified in believing that I’m not a BIV, then how can I know that I’m not? Of course, the question about how I can be justified in believing that I’m not a BIV is not especially hard for externalists to answer. From the point of view of an externalist, the fact that you and the BIV have the very same states of mind need not be at all relevant to the issue of whether you’re justified in believing that you’re not a BIV, since such justification isn’t fully determined by those mental states anyway. The philosophers who have had to do considerable work to answer the question how I can be justified in believing that I’m not a BIV have typically done this work not directly in reply to BKCA, but rather in reply to BJUA. What might justify your belief that you’re not a BIV? According to some philosophers, you are justified in believing that you’re not a BIV because, for instance, you know perfectly well that current technology doesn’t enable anyone to create a BIV. The proponent of the BIV hypothesis might regard this answer as no better than the Moorean response to BKCA: if you are allowed to appeal to (what you regard as your) knowledge of current technology to justify your belief that you’re not a BIV, then why can’t the Moorean equally well rely on his knowledge that he has hands to justify his belief that he’s not a BIV? Philosophers who accept this objection, but who don’t want to ground your justification for believing that you’re not a BIV in purely externalistic factors, may instead claim that your belief is justified by the fact that your own beliefs about the external world provide a better explanation of your sense experiences than does the BIV hypothesis (see Russell 1912 and Vogel 1990 for influential defenses of this argument against skepticism, and see Neta 2004 for a rebuttal). The most influential reply to  BKDA  is to say that, when I acquire evidence that I don’t have hands, such evidence makes me cease to know that I have hands. On this view, when I acquire such evidence, the argument above is sound. But prior to my acquiring such evidence, (4) is false, and so the argument above is not sound. Thus, the truth of (4), and consequently the soundness of this argument, depends on whether or not I have evidence that I don’t have hands. If I do have such evidence, then the argument is sound, but of course it has no general skeptical implications: all it shows that I can’t know some fact whenever I have evidence that the fact doesn’t obtain (versions of this view are defended by Harman 1973 and Ginet 1980). Plausible as this reply has seemed to most philosophers, it has been effectively challenged by Lasonen-Aarnio (2014b). Her argument is this: presumably, it’s possible to have more than enough evidence to know some fact. But if it’s possible to have more than enough evidence to know some fact, it follows that one might still know that fact even if one acquires some slight evidence against it. And yet, it would be wrong to leave one’s confidence entirely unaffected by the slight evidence that one acquires against that fact: though the evidence might be too slight to destroy one’s knowledge, it cannot be too slight to diminish one’s confidence even slightly. So long as one could continue to know a fact while rationally diminishing one’s confidence in it in response to new evidence, the most popular reply to the defeasibility argument fails. Other replies to the defeasibility argument include the denial of premise  (2),[65]  the denial of (4) (McDowell 1982, Kern 2006 [2017]), and the claim that the context-sensitivity of “knows” means that (4) is true only relative to contexts in which the possibility of future defeaters is relevant (see Neta 2002). But neither of these replies has yet received widespread assent. The most common reply to  BEPA  is either to deny premise (1), or to deny that we are justified in believing that premise (1) is true. Most writers would deny premise (1), and would do so on whatever grounds they have for thinking that I can know that I’m not a BIV: knowing that something is not the case excludes that thing’s being epistemically possible for  you.[66] But a couple of influential writers—most notably Rogers Albritton and Thompson Clarke (see Albritton 2011 and Clarke 1972)—do not claim that premise (1) is false. Rather, they deny that we are justified in believing that premise (1) is true. According to these writers, what normally justifies us in believing that something or other is epistemically possible is that we can conceive of discovering that it is true. For instance, what justifies me in believing, say, that it’s possible that Donald Trump has resigned is that I can clearly conceive of discovering that Donald Trump has resigned. But if I attempt to conceive of discovering that I’m a BIV, it’s not clear that I can succeed in this attempt. I may conceive of coming upon some evidence that I’m a BIV—but, insofar as this evidence tells in favor of the hypothesis that I’m a BIV, doesn’t it also undermine its own credibility? In such a case, is there anything at all that would count as “my evidence”? (see Neta forthcoming for an elaboration of this point). Without being able to answer this question in the affirmative, it’s not clear that I can conceive of anything that would amount to discovering that I’m a BIV. Of course, from the fact that I cannot conceive of anything that would amount to discovering that I’m a BIV, it doesn’t follow that I’m not a BIV—and so it doesn’t even follow that it’s not possible that I’m a BIV. But, whether or not it is possible that I’m a BIV, I can’t be justified in thinking that it is. And that’s to say that I can’t be justified in accepting premise (1) of BEPA.