 The idea that we often arrive at representing other people’s mental states by mentally simulating those states in ourselves has a distinguished history in philosophy and the human sciences. Robert Gordon (1995) traces it back to David Hume (1739) and Adam Smith’s (1759) notion of sympathy; Jane Heal (2003) and Gordon (2000) find simulationist themes in the Verstehen approach to the philosophy of history (e.g., Dilthey 1894); Alvin Goldman (2006) considers Theodor Lipps’s (1903) account of empathy (Einfühlung) as a precursor of the notion of mental simulation. In its modern guise, ST was established in 1986, with the publication of Robert Gordon’s “Folk Psychology as Simulation” and Jane Heal’s “Replication and Functionalism”. These two articles criticized the Theory-Theory and introduced ST as a better account of mindreading. In his article, Gordon discussed psychological findings concerning the development of the capacity to represent others’ false beliefs. This attracted the interest of developmental psychologists, especially Paul Harris (1989, 1992), who presented empirical support for ST, and Alison Gopnik (Gopnik & Wellman 1992) and Joseph Perner (Perner & Howes 1992), who argued against it—Perner has since come to defend a hybrid version of ST (Perner & Kühberger 2005). Alvin Goldman was an early and influential defender of ST (1989) and has done much to give the theory its prominence. His work with the neuroscientist Vittorio Gallese (Gallese & Goldman 1998) was the first to posit an important connection between ST and the newly discovered mirror neurons. Goldman’s 2006 book Simulating Minds is the clearest and most comprehensive account to date of the relevant philosophical and empirical issues. Among other philosophical proponents of ST, Gregory Currie and Susan Hurley have been influential. Since the late 1980s, ST has been one of the central players in the philosophical, psychological, and neuroscientific discussions of mindreading. It has however been argued that the fortunes of ST have had a notable negative consequence: the expression “mental simulation” has come to be used broadly and in a variety of ways, making “Simulation Theory” a blanket term lumping together many distinct approaches to mindreading. Stephen Stich and Shaun Nichols (1997) already urged dropping it in favor of a finer-grained terminology. There is some merit to this. ST is in fact better conceived of as a family of theories rather than a single theory. All the members of the family agree on the thesis that mental simulation, rather than a body of knowledge about other minds, plays a central role in mindreading. However, different members of the family can differ from one another in significant respects. One fundamental area of disagreement among Simulation Theorists is the very nature of ST—what kind of theory ST is supposed to be—and what philosophers can contribute to it. Some Simulation Theorists take the question “How do people arrive at representing others’ mental states?” as a straightforward empirical question about the cognitive processes and mechanisms underlying mindreading (Goldman 2006; Hurley 2008). According to them, ST is thus a theory in cognitive science, to which philosophers can contribute exactly as theoretical physicists contribute to physics: theorists specialize in creating and tweaking theoretical structures that comport with experimental data, whereas experimentalists have the primary job of generating the data. (Goldman 2006: 22) Other philosophical defenders of ST, however, do not conceive of themselves as theoretical cognitive scientists at all. For example, Heal (1998) writes that: it is commonly taken that the inquiry into … the extent of simulation in psychological understanding is empirical, and that scientific investigation is the way to tell whether ST … is correct. But this perception is confused. It is an a priori truth … that simulation must be given a substantial role in our personal-level account of psychological understanding. (Heal 1998: 477–478) Adjudicating this meta-philosophical dispute goes well beyond the aim of this entry. To be as inclusive as we can, we shall adopt a “balanced diet” approach: we shall discuss the extent to which ST is supported by empirical findings from psychology and neuroscience, and, at the same time, we shall dwell on “purely philosophical” problems concerning ST. We leave to the reader the task of evaluating which aspects should be put at the centre of the inquiry. Importantly, even those who agree on the general nature of ST might disagree on other crucial issues. We will focus on what are typically taken to be the three most important bones of contention among Simulation Theorists: what is meant by “mental simulation”?  (section 2).  What types of simulation processes are there?  (section 3).  What is the role of mental simulation in mindreading?  (section 4).  After having considered what keeps Simulation Theorists apart, we shall move to discuss what holds them together, i.e., the opposition to the Theory-Theory of mindreading  (section 5  and  section 6).  This should give the reader a sense of the “unity amidst diversity” that characterizes ST.