 The locus classicus of game formalism is not a defence of the position by a convinced advocate, but a demolition job by a great philosopher, Gottlob Frege. Not that he was attacking a straw man position: the highly influential diatribe by Frege in volume II of his Grundgesetze Der Arithmetik (Frege, 1903) is an attack on the work of two real mathematicians, H. E. Heine and Johannes Thomae. Moreover, philosophers of mathematics are wont to claim that the position is still widely adopted by mathematicians. It must be emphasised, however, that “formalism” in this sense—the Heine/Thomae position as interpreted by Frege, and its descendants—is to be distinguished from a more sophisticated position (it is claimed), namely Hilbertian formalism. For more information on the latter see Detlefsen, 1993 or consult the entries on  Hilbert’s program  and  the Frege-Hilbert controversy.)  Detlefsen (2005) also provides a detailed historical treatment of formalist themes in thinkers from the ancient Greeks up to the period of Frege and Hilbert and beyond which is the focus here. Although it is the non-Hilbertian approach we will be concerned with in this entry, we briefly discuss the Hilbertian approach. The Hilbertian position differs because it depends on a distinction within mathematical language between a finitary sector, whose sentences express contentful propositions, and an ideal, or infinitary sector. Where exactly Hilbert drew the distinction, or where it should be drawn, is a matter of debate. Crucially, though, Hilbert adopted an instrumentalistic attitude towards the ideal sector. The formulae of this language are, or are treated as if they are, uninterpreted, having the syntactic form of sentences to which we can apply formal rules of transformation and inference but no semantics. Nonetheless they are, or can be useful, if the ideal sector conservatively extends the finitary, that is if no proof from finitary premisses to a finitary conclusion which takes a detour through the infinitary language yields a conclusion we could not have reached, albeit perhaps (herein lies the utility) by a longer, more unwieldy proof. The goal of the Hilbert programme was to provide a finitary proof of this conservative extension result; most, though not all, think this goal was proved impossible by Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem. Returning now to our non-Hilbertian focus, the earlier formalism which Frege attacked does not divide mathematics into the aforementioned dual categories of the finitary/contentful, and the infinitary/essentially meaningless but, on the contrary, treats all of mathematics in a unitary and homogeneous fashion. From now on I will use ‘formalism’, to refer to the non-Hilbertian positions and will start with an account of the formalist views distilled by Frege from Heine and Thomae and the criticisms he made of them. These criticisms are widely believed now to contain conclusive refutations of the Heine/Thomae approach. But there are a number of post-Fregean views which seem heavily influenced by, or strongly analogous to, formalism. I will go through these in turn: I will conclude with a look at more recent formalist philosophers and an overall assessment of the prospects for formalism in contemporary philosophy of mathematics.