 Buridan's metaphysics is thoroughly informed by his logic. He tries wherever possible to apply the Summulae's analytical techniques to solve problems in speculative philosophy. His approach is critical in the sense that he tends to view traditional problems in metaphysics as based on confusions of logic or language. For the same reason, his solutions are not original in the modern sense of being without precedent, although they have few equals in terms of their elegance and economy of expression. Where philosophical argumentation is concerned, Buridan is a master craftsman. Like most arts masters in fourteenth-century Paris, Buridan is careful to dissociate the metaphysical questions he asks as a philosopher from similar questions that might be asked by a theologian. Jurisdictional disputes forced Parisian arts masters to be quite clear about how they were approaching a  problem,[34]  although what we now identify as medieval philosophy was practiced by both sides. As far as Buridan is concerned, much of the confusion over the proper domains of metaphysics and theology stems from Aristotle himself, who identifies three kinds of speculative science: physics, mathematics, and theology (Aristotle, Metaphysics VI.1.1026a18; XI.7.1064b1). In his question commentary on the Metaphysics, he provides the standard medieval interpretation of this passage, reading ‘theology’ as ‘metaphysics’ and differentiating the three sciences in terms of how they treat their respective subjects: whereas the natural philosopher considers things insofar as they are qualified by motion, and the mathematician insofar as they are quantified by number, the metaphysician considers them only insofar as they pertain to the “concept of being [ad rationem essendi]” (QM VI.2:  34ra).[35]  For the difference between metaphysics and theology, however, we need to go to the very beginning of the commentary, where he offers the following gloss of Aristotle's remarks: The difference is that theologians take their principles (‘principia’ = (lit.) ‘starting points’) from articles of faith rather than, like the philosophers, from what is evident to the senses and intellect. So it is possible for the same question—e.g., about the limits of divine omnipotence—to be raised in both domains, though it will have a more creaturely orientation for the  philosopher.[36]  Buridan concedes de jure place of privilege to theology because of its subject matter, but treats philosophy and theology as de facto equivalent in the speculative realm. Metaphysics, or philosophical wisdom, cannot be ordained by theology because its methods, which are rooted in its principles, are different. Philosophy is accordingly not inferior to theology, just  different.[37] With regard to the problem of  universals,[38]  Buridan does not so much create a new theory as show how our theoretical commitments can be expressed with a minimum of ambiguity and fuss. Like Ockham, he is a nominalist, although this term must be used with caution in later medieval philosophy because of the modern tendency to identify it with the denial of real universals. It must be remembered that most fourteenth-century philosophers were nominalists in this sense because they associated the contrary doctrine with Plato, with whom they were familiar only secondarily as one of the authors whose views are thoroughly discredited by Aristotle in Book I of the  Metaphysics.[39]  But medieval nominalism involved much more than rejecting Platonic universals. Its history can be traced to twelfth-century disputes over the reading of sacred texts, in which the techniques of logicians such as Abelard were pitted against those of grammarians such as Peter  Helias.[40]  As these disputes evolved and matured, nominalism was gradually absorbed into the teaching of philosophers working in the faculty of arts, so that by Buridan's time, it is better to think of nominalism as a practice, or way of doing philosophy, rather than as a piece of doctrine. When Buridan considers questions such as “whether universals actually exist outside the soul” (TDUI: 137), his remarks are almost always aimed at clarifying the meaning of the term ‘universal’ with respect to other terms such as ‘individual’, ‘particular’, and ‘singular’. His rejection of realism is expressed in the claim that universal terms have no ultimate significate, i.e., nothing outside the soul they can ‘make known’ as  such.[41]  Hence, an account is needed of what such terms mean. Here, it is almost as if Buridan thinks there is something ill-formed about propositions where the term ‘universal’ occurs in the subject position, for when confronted with them his first move is always to tell us how the term ‘universal’ is to be understood (QIP 3: 136, ll.  477–488).[42]  He argues further that the primary signification of ‘universal’ is ‘predicable of many’, which makes it a term of second intention, or a term of terms, since only terms are predicable (QIP 3: 135–136; 4: 139; TDUI:  148).[43]  The second-intentional status of the term ‘universal’ is also evident in propositions, where it does not signify a ‘what’ but a ‘how’, i.e., how we conceive of something—in this case how the term so designated is “indifferent to many supposits,” or individuals  (TDUI: 59; see Zupko 2013b).[44]  As we saw above, logic is the study of terms such as ‘proposition’ taken materially, signifying actual tokens of the type (QDI I.1: 6). Moving from propositions to arguments, Buridan insists that terms in the premises and conclusions of demonstrative arguments must be taken as standing materially, i.e., for themselves in the particular discourse conditions which surround them, rather than personally, for their extra-mental significates (QIP 1: 128, ll. 223–237). Likewise, the proximate object of scientific knowledge is the actual demonstrated or demonstrable conclusion rather than the state of affairs it signifies, although Buridan is willing to concede that “the terms of those demonstrable conclusions, or even the things signified by those conclusions” might be considered “remote”, or secondary, objects of knowledge (QIP 1: 127, l.  208–209).[45]  Careful and systematic analysis is the best antidote for metaphysical perplexity because the trouble usually begins with untutored persons who use some word or concept without knowing what it means. On the question of universals, Buridan's main contribution is to develop what Gyula Klima has nicely termed an “essentialist nominalism”, arguing for the reality of the natures underlying our simple substance concepts. Ockham understood universality in terms of the inherent indifference of our cognitive acts, so that despite our having had different particular experiences of horses, say, we are able to form complex concepts that count as universal provided they are able to represent all horses; crucially, there is nothing of the substantial nature of a horse that is conveyed via the senses to the intellect on Ockham's theory. Against this, Buridan argues that substantial concepts cannot merely be collections of complex, connotative concepts, because then we would have the absurd conclusion that substantial terms are not substantial terms, for the concepts according to which they were imposed to signify would not be simple substance concepts: Buridan proceeds to identify four ways in which one can obtain one simple cognition from another directly, or without any inference [QP I.4, ed. Streijger & Bakker:  36–37].[46]  The details need not detain us here, but suffice it to say that the “empiricist” side of Buridan's nominalism is always leavened by Aristotelian naturalism, which he felt was needed to combat skeptical arguments about scientific knowledge, and indeed, about the very existence of substances—arguments Ockham never had to confront. It also should be noted that Buridan's methods do not always produce parsimonious results. Like Ockham, he has only substances and qualities in his basic ontology, but he is much more willing than Ockham to expand this in the direction of modes or ways of being when confronted with recalcitrant phenomena. Thus, he argues that we must treat the question of how something is as distinct from what it is if we are to have a coherent understanding of motion, especially since the Ockhamist view is forced to posit an infinite succession of spatial qualities (QM V.9: 32va; QP II.3, ed. Streijger &  Bakker, 256–263; QP IV.11, ed. Streijger & Bakker,  299–305).[47]  Likewise, in a famous passage, Buridan is driven by his own experience to reject Ockham's explanation of condensation and rarefaction as kinds of locomotion. Why, he asks, does he find himself unable to compress further the air in a bellows which has been stopped up at one end? Not because of its matter, since more matter could exist in a much smaller space; nor because of the substantial form of the air, which would fill a much smaller space once it has been cooled; nor even because of the heat it possesses, since more heat could exist in a much smaller space, such as at the end of a red-hot poker. No, the air must have a distinct quantitative form or magnitude preventing it from being moved. Against those who would do away with this distinction, Buridan argues that “a distinct magnitude of this sort has not been posited in vain, for we have been forced to posit it by compelling arguments that make it seem as useful or even more useful to natural philosophy than [the qualities of] whiteness or blackness” (QP I.8, ed. Streijger & Bakker, 92, ll.  3–6).[48]