 In the medieval university, arts masters provided students with their basic education in grammar, logic or dialectic, and Aristotelian philosophy, subjects that embodied the ideals of literacy and learning in the Middle Ages. What they taught is perhaps best understood as a specialized language of rational inquiry, which became the foundation for further study in the faculties of law, medicine, and theology. Students were required to learn, in ascending order, the exposition and interpretation of authoritative texts (grammar), the structure and modes of argumentative discourse (logic), and finally, the systematic analysis and investigation of the order of nature (Aristotelian philosophy). Although he did not write grammatical  treatises,[8]  Buridan asserts in the very first section of the Summulae that “positive grammar [grammatica positiva] has to be learned first, by means of which the master is able to communicate with the disciple, whether it be in Latin, French, Greek, or Hebrew, or whatever else” (S 1.1.1: 6). The disciple's knowledge of logic and Aristotelian philosophy is built upon this grammatical foundation. The importance of language in Buridan's philosophy emerges on many levels, all of which are driven by his pedagogical aims. In logic, grammatical rules are explicitly subsumed as necessary conditions of the science (scientia) of logic, so that although the logician's notion of truth and the grammarian's notion of congruence are separable in theory, in practice the complete significance of a piece of discourse cannot be determined without both. Context is crucial to interpretation: Accordingly, logic is not about some conceptually ideal or canonical language but the practical art of interpreting human discourse: In Buridan's view, the logician cannot expound the meaning of a proposition without carefully attending to its internal features, i.e., the sense of the particular locutions incorporated in it, as well as to its external features, i.e., the discourse conditions that surround it (see Zupko 2015). This willingness to take human language as it is found, with all of its ambiguities and rough edges, marks an important difference between Buridan and Ockham, the fourteenth-century philosopher with whom he is most often compared. Both make the traditional assumption that propositions, be they spoken, written, or mental, are the bearers of truth and falsity. Ockham, however, tends to see mental propositions as logically ideal or, in modern parlance,  ‘canonical’.[9]  The problem with spoken and written propositions is that because they depend on the meaning conventions of fallible users, they fail to be universal and logically perspicuous.  Thankfully, these shortcomings can be filtered out metalinguistically once we realize that the meanings of their constituent terms depend on their corresponding mental concepts, which naturally signify the same for everyone. So in Ockham's logic, the semantic relation between these concepts and what they signify outside the mind is of paramount importance; spoken and written terms have semantic properties too, of course, but in an entirely derivative way. By contrast, Buridan never privileges conceptual discourse or suggests that the logician might use it systematically to reform spoken or written language. He holds that spoken and written utterances—sometimes he uses the term ‘utterance [vox]’ where Ockham has ‘term [terminus]’—signify concepts primarily: “the capability of speaking was given to us in order that we could signify our concepts to others and also the capacity of hearing was given to us in order that the concepts of speakers could be signified to us” (S 4.1.2: 222). Accordingly, “utterances are imposed to signify things only through the mediation of the concepts by which those things are conceived” (QC 1: 4, ll. 45–6). Concepts are just the medium of signification for Buridan, the cognitive or psychological aspect of the signification of a word. This difference helps to explain why Buridan uses paradoxes of self-reference to test the functionality of his logic, whereas Ockham avoids them by claiming that a term—or at least a term in those circumstances—cannot refer to  itself.[10]  Buridan takes seriously the fact that people can and do utter self-referential propositions, and thinks logicians should say what is going on when they do. This is really a difference of perspective. As Joël Biard has pointed out, we can divide medieval logicians into those who try to restrict the possibilities of human discourse in the direction of what is logically ideal, and those who are willing to accept a proposition because it is grammatical and because the person who utters it intends to signify something by it. Ockham, William of Sherwood, and Walter Burley belong to the former group; Buridan and Thomas Bradwardine to the  latter.[11]  It also explains why Buridan tells us that it is not possible to analyze contradictory propositions unless they “have the same subject and predicate in utterance and also in intention” (S 9.7, 2nd sophism: 943), and his reminding us that, when testing a proposition for contradictoriness, “it is [sometimes] necessary to add other utterances when contradicting it…. For one should primarily attend to the intention, for we use words only to express the intention” (S 9.8, 11th sophism: 979). The logician must above all be a skilled interpreter of human discourse. For Buridan, linguistic confusion is the source of many of the traditional problems of metaphysics and natural philosophy. His approach is broadly nominalistic, but Buridan's nominalism is more of a parsimonious way of doing philosophy than a doctrine about the ontological or metaphysical status of universals.  For example, when a cause is understood as being actual rather than merely potential, does our conception of it qua cause change in any way? Aristotle leaves this ambiguous in Metaphysics V.2, but some medieval philosophers thought it necessary to posit an additional state of affairs to explain the dynamic aspect of causality, i.e., the fact that a contingent state of affairs needs to be brought about by some agent. Thus, if we think of God as the cause of Socrates, there must be something else, God's-being-the-cause-of-Socrates (deum esse causam Sortis), distinct from both God and Socrates, to account for his existence. This ‘something else’ then becomes not only what is signified by the proposition ‘God is the cause of Socrates’ (complexe significabile), but also the proper object of our knowledge that God is the cause of Socrates. Buridan replies by arguing that philosophers who think this way do not know how to interpret human discourse. They take everything too literally. But we should not be misled by what a proposition literally says, or seems to say, into thinking that there must be some new kind of entity corresponding to God's being the cause of Socrates, especially since such reifying moves do not help us to understand what is happening when a cause actually causes (QM V.7–8: 30va–33ra). The same sensitivity to questions of interpretation is evident in his treatment of propositions in natural philosophy, where he argues that we can meaningfully use propositions containing terms such as ‘infinite [infinitum]’ and ‘point [punctum]’ to express actual states of affairs without committing ourselves to the existence of infinite magnitudes or indivisible points. The key is to realize that propositions do not always wear their meanings on their sleeves. Their component terms can be differently construed (e.g., categorematically or syncategorematically), and can even perform different modal functions, which, depending on how the proposition is read (e.g., in a composite or divided sense) can change its truth  conditions.[12]  There will be ambiguities, of course, but Buridan is steadfast in his assumption that the rational inquirer will always be able to sort them out, given the right dialectical tools.