 Following Aristotle and Porphyry, Buridan's logic is based on two distinct, but complementary, conceptions of its purpose: theoretical or pedagogical (logica docens) and practical (logica  utens).[13]  The former, he says, is so called because “it teaches [docet] us how, and from what [materials], arguments should be constructed, whether those arguments be demonstrative, dialectical, or of some other kind”. The latter takes its name from the fact that “it uses [utitur] arguments in order to prove whether some conclusion is evident, regardless of the subject matter of the conclusion” (QIP 1: 126–7, ll.176–80). But since the teaching of logic is ordained to its use, Buridan holds that logic is ultimately a practical rather than a speculative discipline. Historians of logic usually classify Buridan among the terminists or ‘moderns’, a diverse group of thirteenth and fourteenth-century logicians who regarded the semantic properties of terms (literally, the ‘ends [termini]’, or subjects and predicates, of propositions) as the primary unit of logical analysis.  As we saw above, in addition to commenting on Aristotle's Organon, he wrote a logical compendium, the Summulae de dialectica, ostensibly as a commentary on Peter of Spain's Summulae logicales, an influential terminist textbook written a century earlier. But Buridan's Summulae was essentially a new work, more that ten times longer than the original and featuring many new and completely rewritten sections. In it, Buridan leads his students and readers through an orderly progression of teachings, beginning with propositions (Treatise I), shifting down to the signification and referential function of their component terms (II-IV), then back up to terms and propositions insofar as they figure in more complex patterns of reasoning: syllogisms (V), topics (VI), fallacies (VII), and finally, demonstrations (VIII). The work concludes with a kind of exercise book on paradoxical and otherwise puzzling propositions, showing how they can be resolved using the techniques of the previous eight treatises. No encyclopedia article can do justice to the richness and variety of Buridan's logic; it was interest in logic that first revived the study of his work fifty years ago, and logic remains the one area in which Buridan can speak directly to modern philosophical audiences.  The main reason for this is that Buridan's project of developing a token-based semantics to ground his nominalist ontology is shared by many philosophers of language today; likewise, the method of his Treatise on Consequences has been rightly described by Hubert Hubien as “very modern: we have here what is without doubt the first attempt, albeit very imperfect, at an axiomatic exposition of logic on the basis of the propositional calculus.”[14] Nevertheless, this section will have the more modest aim of showing showing how Buridan practiced the dialectical art and influenced logic and semantics well into the sixteenth century. First, Buridan did much to streamline and better articulate the methods of terminist logic. The most important analytical tool in the Summulae is the doctrine of suppositio [supposition], which had been a feature of terminist logic for several generations by the time Buridan arrived in Paris. Terms were thought to possess two general semantic properties: signification, or what a term ‘makes known’ in the mind of the person who sees it or hears it or conceives of it, whether mediately or immediately (thus, the written term ‘Socrates’ brings to mind the concept of Socrates, which in turn signifies the actual person); and supposition, which refers to the capacity of certain substantive terms to stand for or ‘pick out’ something in a particular context, such as in a proposition. Although the analogy is not perfect, supposition performs many of the same functions as what we would call the theory of  reference.[15]  Traditional accounts divided supposition into proper supposition, where a term is used with its typical or standard meaning, and improper supposition, where a term is used in some metaphorical or figurative sense. Most logicians went on to distinguish three kinds of proper supposition: personal, where a term stands for what it signifies (e.g., ‘Socrates’ in ‘Socrates is a man’); material, where it stands for itself (e.g., ‘man’ in ‘Man has three letters’); and simple, where it stands for a common nature or concept (e.g., ‘man’ in ‘Man is a species’). Simple supposition appears to have been a vestige of early terminist  logic,[16]  whose realist practitioners needed to distinguish between referring to a universal thing and referring to a particular thing. But by the fourteenth century, the whole notion of universals had become more controversial, and nominalist logicians in particular were not about to accept any special device for referring to them through common terms such as ‘man’. So simple supposition was readapted to model reference to common concepts or intentions. Thus, Ockham holds that a term exhibits simple supposition when it supposits “for a concept in the mind [pro conceptu mentis],” and is not being used  significatively.[17]  What united Ockham and his terminist predecessors was their realization that if the proposition ‘Man is a species’ is to be true, then the term ‘man’ cannot supposit personally for any of the individual men it ultimately signifies, since it cannot be said of any of them that he is a species (Socrates is a man, not a species).  Accordingly, the reference of ‘man’ must be to a common nature or concept. But Buridan contends that there are only two ways a term can stand for something in a proposition, personally and materially: Buridan sees that it is misleading to assign a special logical sense to terms being used to refer to themselves or to the concepts they express, as if this were any different from figurative or metaphorical usage, since only terms that refer to things existing per se are being used in their proper sense. Thus, terms can stand either for the things they ordinarily signify, in which case they supposit personally, or for something else, in which case they supposit materially. Material supposition applies whenever a term is used in some way that departs from the meaning imposed upon it by the linguistic community: Notice that the default interpretation of a term is its proper sense, defined as “the signification properly and principally given to it”. The proper signification of a term must be based on the fact that “utterances were primarily and principally imposed to signify so as to stand for their ultimate significata, and not for themselves” (S 4.3.2:  256);[18]  that is to say, just as concepts (at least in the first instance) naturally signify those extra-mental things that just as naturally give rise to them, so spoken and written terms (at least in the first instance) are imposed to signify, via their corresponding concepts, the same ultimate  significata.[19]  For Buridan, this capacity is natural to us as creatures endowed with the power of cognition. It is why he insists that determining the nature of concepts pertains not to logic but to psychology or metaphysics, speculative sciences whose conclusions cannot be otherwise (QDI I.3:6, ll.  4–10).[20]  So even if we say that the proposition, ‘Man is a species’ is true insofar as it is put forward in the context of Aristotle's Categories, it is not literally true, or true according to “the signification properly and principally given to it”, because of no per se existing man is it true to say that he is a species. What happens is that when we work on the Categories, we follow Aristotle's lead and depart from conventional usage in such a way that the term ‘man’ supposits not for individual men but for the universal concept according to which it was imposed to signify, in which case the proposition is true because “species and genera are universals according to predication” (S 4.3.2: 254). So it can be true that man is a species without it being literally true that man is a species. The second way in which Buridan changed the dialectical landscape was to extend the range of traditional logic. There are numerous examples of this, not all of which are uncontroversial because it is often hard to tell what Buridan intended to achieve by a given innovation (this goes for other medieval logicians as  well).[21]  But a fairly uncontroversial example can be found in his use of supposition to examine the structure of certain complex terms that would remain unanalyzed on the traditional account of syllogistic inferences. Of particular importance here is the doctrine of ampliation. Thus, although the syllogism, ‘Nothing dead is an animal, some man is dead; therefore, some man is not an animal’, is an acceptable fourth-mode syllogism of the first figure (Ferio), Buridan denies that the consequence is “formally valid”. The reason is that in this syllogism, ‘man’ is an ampliative term, and “from an ampliated nondistributed term the same term does not follow nonampliated” that is, “in the minor proposition the term ‘man’ was ampliated to past [things], whereas in the conclusion it was not ampliated,” making the premises true but the conclusion false (S 5.3.2: 326; cf. QAnPr I.14). Similarly, terms referring to the divine persons sometimes generate counterexamples to the traditionally accepted modes. Thus, “the following syllogism in Barbara is invalid: ‘Every God is the son, every divine Father is God; therefore every divine Father is the Son”, for the transitivity of identity fails in cases “where the most simple unity is a trinity of really distinct persons” (S 5.3.2: 327). Buridan also urges the reader to be wary of modal contexts introduced by verbs of knowing and believing because “the verb ‘know’ ampliates the subject to supposit not only for present things, but also for future and past ones”. This means that without suitable qualification, “although I know that every man is an animal, nevertheless, it does not follow that every man is known by me to be an animal; for then it would follow that every man, whether alive or dead or yet to be born, would be known by me to be an animal, which is false” (S 5.6.8: 348). What is noteworthy in these and other examples is Buridan's use of the doctrine of supposition to extend the range of ‘truth-makers’ for modal inferences, e.g., in his assumption that “the presence of a modal copula—any modal copula—in a proposition ampliates the subject to stand for not only the actual things but also the possible things that fall under that  term”.[22]  Because it makes merely possible objects relevant to the evaluation of modal inferences, ampliation can be seen as a kind of Buridanian equivalent of possible worlds semantics, though it would be a mistake to regard it as a remarkable anticipation of that twentieth-century doctrine. Buridan's remarks on its theoretical significance are  few,[23]  and, despite the degree of technical sophistication involved, he probably did not see it as a radical innovation, but as part of his ongoing effort to make existing schemes for checking inferences more practicable. Third, and finally, Buridan made major contributions to certain forms of logical inquiry that originated in the medieval period. Most modern logicians know of his solutions to alethic paradoxes such as the Liar, addressed in the eighth and final chapter of ninth treatise of the Summulae, which belongs to the medieval literature of sophismata or  insolubilia.[24]  The 7th sophism Buridan considers is ‘Every proposition is false’.  The case posits “that all true propositions are annihilated while the false ones remain [in existence], and then Socrates propounds only this [proposition]: ‘Every proposition is false’” (S 9.8, 7th sophism: 965). The question is then asked whether Socrates's proposition is true or false. The arguments on each side of the question illustrate the difficulties one faces if ‘true’ and ‘false’ are interpreted strictly. The argument that it is false assumes that “it is impossible for the same proposition to be true and false when propounded in the same language and understood in the same way by everyone hearing it”, and proceeds to argue that the sophism is false because any proposition which entails its own contradictory is impossible, and therefore false. The opposite side begins by focusing on the logical form of the sophism as a universal affirmative that has no counter-instance in the case at hand, which stated that all true propositions have been annihilated with only the false ones remaining. Second, the sophism must be true because the subject and predicate terms supposit for the same things: if every proposition is false, then each and every propositional significate of the term ‘every proposition’ must be false, as it indeed is, according to the case. Finally, the sophism must be true because “it signifies only that every proposition is false; and this is how things are [ita est]”, according to the case (S 9.8, 7th sophism: 965). Buridan writes as if this particular sophism enjoyed some notoriety among logic teachers at Paris, although all but one of the alternative solutions he mentions were discussed and criticized from the very beginning of the insolubilia literature. These involve various ad hoc proposals that either build new assumptions into the case or else make up new rules about how the terms of the sophism are to be  interpreted.[25]  Into the first category falls a solution known as the ‘transcasus’, which involves the bizarre suggestion that the time Socrates utters his proposition and the time referred to by the verb of the proposition are not the same.  This would allow us to say that if there are no true propositions during the first hour of a certain day, Socrates could utter his proposition at the end of this hour and it would be true, where he is understood as referring “not to the time at which he speaks but to the time of that first hour”. But this is of no help if we stick to the case and assume that the times are the same.  Alternatively, in a solution advocated by the ‘restringentes [restrictors]’—so-called because they avoided self-reference by restricting what a term can supposit for—we could make the proposition non-reflexive by stipulating that “terms that are apt to supposit for propositions are not put in propositions to supposit for the propositions in which they are put, but for others”. But Buridan rightly rejects this second strategy as failing to take seriously our conventional understanding of terms, for when one uses the term ‘proposition’, he says, “one understands indifferently all propositions, indeed, present, past, and future ones, his own as well as those of another person”. A moment's reflection should make it obvious that “this solution is worth nothing: for what one understands, of that he can speak [quod aliquis intelligit, de hoc potest loqui]” (S 9.8, 7th sophism:  966).[26] Buridan's quick answer to the sophism is that Socrates's proposition is false in the case at hand. But before moving on to his final answer, he first discusses a solution described as being held by some people, including  himself.[27]  This is that there is another condition, in addition to the requirement that its terms stand for the same thing or things, which a proposition must meet if it is to be true. A proposition must also signify or assert itself to be true (S 9.8, 7th sophism:  967).[28]  In her detailed analysis of this sophism, Fabienne Pironet has shown that the text in which Buridan defends this earlier view is his question commentary on Aristotle's Posterior Analytics, where it is expressed in terms of the traditional formula that “howsoever [a proposition] signifies, so it is [qualitercumque significat, ita est]” (QAnPo  I.10).[29]  Now Buridan holds that all propositions satisfy this condition trivially: “every proposition by its form signifies or asserts itself to be true” (S 9.8, 7th sophism: 967). The problem with self-referential paradoxes is that they also seem to signify that they are false. Thus, although the proposition ‘I say what is false [ego dico falsum]’ “signifies itself to be true in some fashion, nevertheless this is not so entirely, or howsoever it signifies [licet aliqualiter sic significat, non tamen totaliter vel qualitercumque ita est].  Therefore it is false” (QAnPo I.10). Unfortunately, this looks no less ad hoc than the transcasus and restriction solutions he has just criticized. Why shouldn't other propositions, besides the paradoxical ones, be able to signify that they are false? Buridan does not say in his commentary on the Posterior Analytics, and in the Summulae he rejects his earlier view for the rather different reason that it is false “that every proposition signifies or asserts itself to be true” (S 9.8, 7th sophism: 968). His argument is not exactly clear, but the problem appears to be semantic: he cannot find an interpretation of the phrase ‘itself to be true [se esse veram]’ in the supplementary condition that will permit it to function as a general principle. Consider the proposition ‘A man is an animal [homo est animal]’. If we understand it materially, i.e., as standing for a proposition, then it will signify ‘The proposition “A man is an animal” is true’, which is false because it refers to second intentions (concepts or signs by means of which we conceive of other concepts or signs as such), and the original proposition refers to things (human beings and animals), not concepts. But what if we say that a proposition signifies itself to be true if it is taken significatively for the things or first intentions, rather than materially? This will not work either, argues Buridan, because then the affirmative proposition ‘A man is a donkey [homo est asinus]’ would signify that a man is a donkey, which is false because the subject term ‘man’ does not supposit for anything (no human beings are  donkeys).[30]  Accordingly, we cannot base our solution to self-referential paradoxes on the idea that every proposition signifies or asserts itself to be  true.[31] The solution Buridan finally settles on receives the somewhat tepid endorsement of being “closer to the truth” than the previous solution—a reflection, perhaps, of his awareness of the imperfectability of any formal system that tries to stick close to the facts of human language. Here, the idea that a proposition formally signifies itself to be true is replaced by the notion of implication from the doctrine of consequences. “Every proposition,” he says, “virtually implies another proposition in which the predicate ‘true’ is affirmed of the subject that supposits for [the original proposition]” (S 9.8, 7th sophism:  969).[32]  Unlike the old solution, in which the second proposition is signified by the first and hence part of its meaning, the new solution assumes only that the second proposition follows logically from the first, so that its meaning can be expounded separately. In this way, for the truth of any proposition P, it is required not only (1) that the subject and predicate terms of P stand for the same thing or  things,[33]  but also (2) that P implies another proposition, ‘P is true’, which must also be true. Otherwise, we would have a true antecedent and a false consequent, violating Buridan's fifth theorem regarding assertoric consequences, which states, “it is impossible for what is false to follow from what is true [impossibile est ex veris sequi falsum]” (TC I.8: 34, l. 97; Read (tr.) 2015: 77–78). Applying this to the 7th sophism, the constituent terms in the proposition uttered by Socrates—‘Every proposition’ and ‘false’—stand for the same things, since in the posited case, “all true propositions are annihilated and the false ones remain, and then Socrates propounds only this: ‘Every proposition is false’”. So the first condition is satisfied. But the implied proposition, ‘P is true’ (where P is the name of ‘Every proposition is false’), is false because its constituent terms, ‘Every proposition is false’ and ‘true’, do not stand for the same thing, since ex hypothesi, P stands for the antecedent proposition ‘Every proposition is false’, not for things that are true. But this gives us a true antecedent and a false consequent, and so the consequence does not hold. Therefore, the sophism is false.