 John Buridan was born sometime before 1300 at or near the town of Béthune in Picardy, France. He was educated in Paris, first at the Collège Lemoine, where he was awarded a benefice or stipend for needy students, and then at the University of Paris, where he received his Master of Arts degree and formal license to teach by the mid-1320s. He enjoyed a long and illustrious career as an arts master at Paris, serving twice (in 1328 and 1340) as university rector and supporting himself with numerous benefices. He last appears alive and well in a document of 1358, which mentions him adjudicating a territorial dispute between the English and Picard nations (the Parisian student body at the time was organized according to one's place of origin). He must have died shortly thereafter because in 1361, one of his benefices was awarded to another  person.[1] Such is the historical record—a handful of relatively minor  details.[2]  Buridan's fame as a teacher and philosopher, however, quickly turned his life into the stuff of legend. There are stories that he met his end when the King of France had him thrown into the Seine River in a sack because of a scandalous affair with the Queen, that he went on to found the University of Vienna after being expelled from Paris for his nominalist teachings, and that he even hit the future Pope Clement VI over the head with a shoe while competing for the affections of the wife of a German shoemaker (the blow apparently created the prodigious memory for which Clement was widely known). But none of these stories can be independently verified, and most are inconsistent with what we do know about  him.[3]  Nevertheless, they illustrate what the French scholar Edmond Faral called the “bruits de ville” or ‘buzz’ surrounding Buridan's name in Parisian circles, which continued for some time after his death (Faral 1950, 16). Buridan's academic career was unusual in two respects, both of which help to explain his philosophical outlook. First, he appears to have spent his entire career in the faculty of arts, without moving on to study for a doctoral degree in one of the more prestigious faculties of law, medicine, or theology, which was the more typical career path of a medieval academic. Most of the figures we think of today as medieval philosophers were in fact trained as theologians, including Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and even William of Ockham (though he did not finish his degree). Since university statutes forbade arts masters from teaching or writing about theology, Buridan produced no theological works and no commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard, the principal genre of philosophical writing in the fourteenth century. Why did Buridan remain in the faculty of arts? It is unlikely that someone of his obvious philosophical ability would have gone unnoticed. Nor does the reason appear to have been a lack of means, for despite his impoverished background he did receive a number of bursaries and stipends, and is even listed in a document of 1349 as being among those masters capable of supporting themselves without financial assistance from the University. One possible answer—though in the absence of concrete evidence that he never studied theology, it must remain speculative—is that he deliberately chose to remain among the ‘artists [artistae]’. What little he does say about philosophy very clearly ties the philosophical enterprise to his office as an arts master, not to whatever it was theologians took themselves to be doing.  Rejecting the traditional picture of theological learning as the perfection or completion of philosophical wisdom, Buridan seems to articulate, sometimes in spite of himself, a new vision of philosophy as a secular enterprise based on what is evident to the senses and intellect, in contrast to theology, which begins from non-evident truths revealed in scripture and doctrine.[4] Perhaps most tellingly, Buridan never refers to theology as constituting a ‘scientia’, or body of knowledge—an assumption almost all theologians took great pains to defend in their commentaries on the  Sentences.[5] Buridan is also different in that he remained for his entire life a secular cleric rather than joining a religious order such as the Dominicans or Franciscans. A papal letter of 1329 refers to him as simply, “clericus Atrebatensis diocoesis, magister in artibus [a cleric from the Diocese of Arras and Master of  Arts]” (Faral 1950, 11).  By contrast, the best-known names of the period all had religious and intellectual affiliations beyond the university: Thomas Aquinas (Dominican), Duns Scotus (Franciscan), William of Ockham (Franciscan), Gregory of Rimini (Augustinian), to name a few. The benefit for Buridan was that it freed him from the obligation to enter into the doctrinal disputes that had begun to arise, with alarming frequency and intensity, between religious orders, or between an order and the church hierarchy—e.g., the dispute between the papacy and the Franciscans over apostolic poverty. Thus, whereas Ockham spent his entire later career on political crusades, away from philosophy, and was finally excommunicated for his troubles, Buridan was bound only by the intellectual and pedagogical traditions of his university. His confessional independence also meant that he could help himself to philosophical insights from a variety of sources. This occasionally emerges in the eclectic character of his work, as we shall see below.