 Towards the end of the eighteenth century, Kant could say (without much exaggeration) that logic had followed a single path since its inception, and that “since Aristotle it has not had to retrace a single step.” He also said that syllogistic logic was “to all appearance complete and perfect.” But this was exuberance. Indeed, some of the real successes highlighted known problems. Some valid schemata are reducible to others, in that any inference of the reducible form can be revealed as valid (with a little work) given other schemata. Consider (9). Assume that ‘Al did not run’ negates ‘Al ran’, while ‘Bob did not swim’ negates ‘Bob swam’. Then (9) is an instance of the following valid form: if A then either not-A or not-B, and A; so not-B. But we can treat this as a derived form, by showing that any instance of this form is valid given two (intuitively more basic) Stoic inference forms: if the first then the second, and the first, so the second; either not the first or not the second, and the first; so not the second. For suppose we are given the following premises: A; and if A, then either not-A or not-B. We can safely infer that either not-A or not-B; and since we were given that A, we can safely infer that not-B. Similarly, the syllogistic schema (10) can be treated as a derived form. If some S is not P, and every D is P, then it isn't true that every S is D. For if every S is D, and every D is P, then every S is P. But if some S is not P, then as we saw above, not every S is P. So given the premises of (10), adding ‘every S is D’ would lead to contradiction: every S is P, and not every S is P.  So the premises imply the negation of ‘every S is D’. This reasoning shows how (10) can be reduced to inferential patterns that seem more basic—raising the question of how much reduction is possible. Euclid's geometry had provided a model for how to present a body of knowledge as a network of propositions that follow from a few basic axioms. Aristotle himself indicated how to reduce all the valid syllogistic schemata to four basic patterns, given a few principles that govern how the basic patterns can be used to derive others; see Parsons (2014) for discussion. And further reduction is possible given insights from the medieval period. Consider the following pair of valid inferences: Fido is a brown dog, so Fido is a dog; Fido is not a dog, so Fido is not a brown dog. As illustrated with the first example, replacing a predicate (or general term) like ‘brown dog’ with a less restrictive predicate like ‘dog’ is often valid. But sometimes—paradigmatically, in cases involving negation—replacing a predicate like ‘dog’ with a more restrictive predicate like ‘brown dog’ is valid. Plausibly, the first pattern reflects the default direction of valid replacement: removing a restriction preserves truth, except in special cases like those involving negation. Suppose we take it as given that poodles are dogs of a particular sort, and hence that every poodle is a dog. Then replacing‘poodle’ with ‘dog' in ‘Fido is P’ is valid, regardless of what ‘Fido’ names. This can be viewed as a special case of ‘n is P, and every P is D; so n is D’. But the validity of this inference form can also be viewed as symptom of a basic principle that came be called dictum de omni: whatever is true of every P is true of any P. Or as Aristotle might have put it, if the property of being a dog belongs to every poodle, then it belongs to any poodle. In which case, Fido is a dog if Fido is a poodle. And since the property of being a dog surely belongs to every brown dog, any brown dog is a dog. The flip side of this point is that negation inverts the default direction of inference. Anything that isn't a dog isn't a brown dog; and similarly, if Fido isn't a dog, Fido isn't a poodle. So in special cases, adding a restriction to a general term like ‘dog’ can preserve truth. From this perspective, the Aristotelian quantifier ‘Some’ is a default-style quantifier that validates removing restrictions. If some brown dog is a clever mutt, it follows that some dog is a clever mutt, and hence that some dog is a mutt. By contrast, ‘No’ is an inverted-style quantifier that validates adding restrictions.  If no dog is a mutt, it follows that no dog is a clever mutt, and hence that no brown dog is a clever mutt. The corresponding principle, dictum de nullo, encodes this pattern: whatever is true of no P is not true of any P; so if the property of being a mutt belongs to no dog, it belongs to no poodle. (And as Aristotle noted, instances of ‘No S is P’ can be analyzed as the propositional negations of corresponding instances of ‘Some S isn't P’. Interestingly, ‘Every’ is like ‘No’ in one respect, and like ‘Some’ in another respect. If every dog is clever, it follows that every brown dog is clever; but if every dog is a clever mutt, it follows that every dog is a mutt. So when the universal quantifier combines with a general term S to form a subject, S is governed by the inverted rule of replacement.  But when a universally quantified subject combines with a second general term to form a proposition, this second term is governed by the default rule of replacement. Given that ‘Every’ has this mixed logical character, the valid syllogisms can be derived from two basic patterns (noted above), both of which reflect dictum de omni: whatever is true of every P is true of any P. Every S is P, and every P is D; so every S is D. Every S is P, and some D is S; so some D is P. The first principle reflects the sense in which universal quantification is transitive. The second principle captures the idea that a universal premise can licence replacement of ‘S’ with ‘P’ in a premise about a specific individual. In this sense, classical logic exhibits a striking unity and simplicity, at least with regard to inferences involving the Aristotelian quantifiers and predication; see Sommers (1984) and Ludlow (2005), drawing on Sanchez (1991), for further discussion. Alas, matters become more complicated once we consider relations. Sentences like ‘Juliet kissed Romeo’ do not seem to have Subject-copula-Predicate form. One might suggest ‘Juliet was a kisser of Romeo’ as a paraphrase. But ‘kisser of Romeo’ differs, in ways that matter to inference, from general terms like ‘politician’. If Juliet (or anyone) was a kisser of Romeo, it follows that someone was kissed; whereas if Juliet was a politician, there is no corresponding logical consequence to the effect that someone was __-ed. Put another way, the proposition that Juliet kissed someone exhibits interesting logical structure, even if we can express this proposition via the sentence ‘Juliet was a kisser of someone’. A quantifier can be part of a complex predicate. But classical logic did not capture the validity of inferences involving predicates that have quantificational constituents.  Consider (11). If ‘respects every doctor’ and ‘respects some liar’ indicate nonrelational proposition-parts, much like ‘is sick’ or ‘is happy’, then inference (11) has the following form ‘Some P is S, and some D is L; so some P is H’. But this schema, which fails to reflect the quantificational structure within the predicates is not valid. Its instances include bad inferences like the following: some patient is sick, and some doctor is a liar; so some patient is happy. This dramatizes the point that ‘respects every doctor’ and ‘respects some liar’ are—unlike ‘is sick’ and ‘is tall’—logically related in a way that matters given the middle premise of (11). One can adopt the view that many propositions have relational parts, introducing a variable ‘R’ intended to range over relations; see the entries on  medieval relations, and  medieval terms. One can also formulate the following schema: some P R every D, and some D is L; so some P R some L.  But the problem remains. Quantifiers can appear in complex predicates that figure in valid inferences like (12). But if ‘patient who respects every doctor’ and ‘patient who saw every lawyer’ are nonrelational, much like ‘old patient’ or ‘young patient’, then (12) has the following form: every O is S, and some Y R every D; so some Y is S. And many inferences of this form are invalid. For example: every otter is sick, and some yak respects every doctor; so some yak is sick. Again, one can abstract a valid schema that covers (12), letting parentheses indicate a relative clause that restricts the adjacent predicate. But no matter how complex the schema, the relevant predicates can exhibit further quantificational structure. (Consider the proposition that every patient who met some doctor who saw no lawyer respects some lawyer who saw no patient who met every doctor.) Moreover, schemata like the one above are poor candidates for basic inference patterns. As medieval logicians knew, propositions expressed with relative clauses also pose other difficulties; see the entry on  medieval syllogism.  If every doctor is healthy, it follows that every young doctor is healthy. By itself, this is expected, since a universally quantified subject is governed by the non-default (de nullo) inference rule that licenses replacement of ‘doctor’ with the more restrictive ‘young doctor’. But consider (13) and (14). Here, the direction of valid inference is from ‘young doctor’ to ‘doctor’, as if the inference is governed by the default (de omni) inferential rule. One can say that the default direction of implication, from more restrictive to less restrictive predicates, has been inverted twice—once by ‘No’, and once by ‘every’. But one wants a systematic account of propositional structure that explains the net effect; see Ludlow (2002) for further discussion. Sommers (1982) offers a strategy for recoding and extending classical logic, in part by exploiting an idea suggested by Leibniz (and arguably Panini): a relational sentence like ‘Juliet loved Romeo’ somehow combines an active-voice sentence with a passive-voice sentence, perhaps along the lines of ‘Juliet loved, and thereby Romeo was loved’; cp. section nine below.  But if impeccability is to be revealed as a matter of form, then one way or another, quantifiers need to characterized in a way that captures their general logical role—and not just their role as potential subjects of Aristotelian propsitions. Quantifiers are not simply devices for creating schemata like ‘Every S is P’, into which general terms like ‘politician’ and ‘deceitful’ can be inserted. Instances of ‘S’ and ‘P’ can themselves have quantificational structure and relational constituents.