 The earliest construction on Russell’s 1924 list is the famous “Frege/Russell definition” of numbers as classes of equinumerous classes from 1901 (Russell 1993, 320). The definition follows the example of the definitions of the notions of limit and continuity that were proposed for the calculus in the preceding century. Russell did not rest content with adopting the Peano axioms as the basis for the theory of the natural numbers and then showing how the properties of the numbers could be logically deduced from those axioms. Instead, he defined the basic notions of “number” , “successor” and “0” and proposed to show, with carefully chosen definitions of their basic notions in terms of logical notions, that those axioms could be derived from principles of logic alone. Russell defined natural numbers as classes of equinumerous classes. Any  pair , a class with two members, can be put into a one to one correspondence with any other, hence all pairs are  equinumerous. The number two is then identified with the class of all pairs. The relation between equinumerous classes when there is such a one to one mapping relating them is called “similarity”. Similarity is defined solely in terms of logical notions of quantifiers and identity. With the natural numbers so defined, Peano axioms can be derived by logical means alone. After natural numbers, Russell adds “series, ordinal numbers and real numbers” (1924, 166) to his list of constructions, and then concludes with the construction of matter. Russell credits A. N. Whitehead with the solution to the problem of the relation of sense data to physics that he adopted in 1914: I have been made aware of the importance of this problem by my friend and collaborator Dr Whitehead, to whom are due almost all the differences between the views advocated here and those suggested in The Problems of Philosophy. I owe to him the definition of points, and the suggestion for the treatment of instants and “things,” and the whole conception of the world of physics as a construction rather than an inference. (Russell 1914b, vi) It is only later, in an essay in which Russell reflected on his philosophy that he also described his earlier logical proposals as “logical constructions.” The first specific formulation of this method of replacing inference with construction as a general method in philosophy is in the essay “Logical Atomism”: One very important heuristic maxim which Dr. Whitehead and I found, by experience, to be applicable in mathematical logic, and have since applied to various other fields, is a form of Occam’s Razor. When some set of supposed entities has neat logical properties, it turns out, in a great many instances, that the supposed entities can be replaced by purely logical structures composed of entities which have not such neat properties. In that case, in interpreting a body of propositions hitherto believed to be about the supposed entities, we can substitute the logical structures without altering any of the detail of the body of propositions in question. This is an economy, because entities with neat logical properties are always inferred, and if the propositions in which they occur can be interpreted without making this inference, the ground for the inference fails, and our body of propositions is secured against the need of a doubtful step. The principle may be stated in the form: ‘Whenever possible, substitute constructions out of known entities for inferences to unknown entities’. (Russell 1924, 160) Russell was referring to logical constructions in this frequently quoted passage from his Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. He objects to introducing entities with implicit definitions, that is, as being those things that obey certain axioms or “postulates”: The method of ‘postulating’ what we want has many advantages; they are the same as the advantages of theft over honest toil. Let us leave them to others and proceed with our honest toil. (Russell 1919, 71) He charges that we need a demonstration that there are any objects which satisfy those axioms.The “toil” here is the work of formulating definitions of the numbers so that they can be shown to satisfy the axioms using logical inference alone. The description of logical constructions as “incomplete symbols” derives from the use of contextual definitions that provide an analysis or substitute for each sentence in which a defined symbol may occur. The definition does not give an explicit definition, such as an equation with the defined expression on one side that is identified with a definiendum on the other, or a universal statement giving necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of the term in isolation. The connection between being a fiction and expressed by an “incomplete symbol” can be seen in Russell’s constructions of finite cardinal and ordinal numbers by means of the theory of classes. That “no-classes” theory, via the contextual definitions for class terms, makes all the numbers “incomplete symbols”, and so numbers can be seen as “logical fictions”. The notions of construction and logical fiction appear together in this account from Russell’s “Philosophy of Logical Atomism” lectures: You find that a certain thing which has been set up as a metaphysical entity can either be assumed dogmatically to be real, and then you will have no possible argument either for its reality or against its reality; or, instead of doing that, you can construct a logical fiction having the same formal properties, or rather having formally analogous formal properties to those of the supposed metaphysical entity and itself composed of empirically given things, and the logical fiction can be substituted for your supposed metaphysical entity and will fulfill all the scientific purposes that anyone can desire. (Russell 1918, 144) Incomplete symbols, descriptions, classes and logical fictions are identified with each other and then with the “familiar objects of daily life” in the following passage from earlier in the lectures: There are a great many other sorts of incomplete symbols besides descriptions. There are classes… and relations taken in extension, and so on. Such aggregations of symbols are really the same as what I call “logical fictions”, and they embrace practically all the familiar objects of daily life: tables, chairs, Piccadilly, Socrates, and so on. Most of them are either classes, or series, or series of classes. In any case they are all incomplete symbols, i.e. they are aggregations that only have a meaning in use and do not have any meaning in themselves. (Russell 1918, 122) In what follows these various features of logical constructions will be disentangled. The result appears to be a connected series of analyses sharing at least a family resemblance with each other. The common feature is that in each case some formal or “neat” properties of objects that had to be postulated in axioms before could now be derived as logical consequences of definitions. The replaced entities are variously “fictions”, “incomplete symbols” or simply “constructions” depending on the form that the definitions take.