 Whether or not they are provided with contextual definitions by Whitehead and Russell, logical constructions do not appear as the referents of logically proper names, and so by that account constructions are not a part of the fundamental “furniture” of the world. Early critical discussions of constructions, such as Wisdom (1931), stressed the contrast between logically proper names, which do refer, and constructions, which were thus seen as ontologically innocent. Beginning with The Problems of Philosophy in 1912, Russell turned repeatedly to the problem of matter. As has been described by Omar Nasim (2008), Russell was stepping into an ongoing discussion of the relation of sense data to matter that was being carried on by T.P. Nunn (1910), Samuel Alexander (1910), G.F. Stout (1914), and G.E. Moore (1914), among others. The participants of this “Edwardian controversy”, as Nasim terms it, shared a belief that direct objects of perception, with their sensory qualities, were nonetheless extra-mental. The concept of matter, then, was the result of a loosely described social or psychological “construction”, going beyond what was directly perceived. A project shared by the participants in the controversy was the search for a refutation of George Berkeley’s idealism, which would show how the existence and real nature of matter can be discovered. In The Problems of Philosophy (Russell 1912) Russell argues that the belief in the existence of matter is a well supported hypothesis that explains our experiences. Matter is known only indirectly, “by description”, as the cause, whatever it may be, of our sense data, which we directly know by “by acquaintance”. This is an example of the sort of hypothesis that Russell contrasts with construction in the famous passage about “theft” and “honest toil”. Russell saw an analogy between the case of simply hypothesizing the existence of numbers with certain properties, those described by axioms, and hypothesizing the existence of matter. The need for some sort of account of the logical features of matter, what he called “the problem of matter”, had already occupied Russell much earlier. While we distinguish the certain knowledge we may have of mathematical entities from the contingent knowledge of material objects, Russell says that there are certain “neat” features of matter that are just too tidy to have turned out by accident. Examples include the most general spatiotemporal properties of objects, that no two can occupy the same place at the same time, which he calls “impenetrability”, and so on. In The Principles of Mathematics (Russell 1903, §453) there is a list of these features of matter including “indestructibility”, “ingenerability” and “impenetrability”, which were all characteristic of the atomic theory of the day. Russell followed the progression through the exact sciences from logic through arithmetic, and then real numbers and then to infinite cardinals. There followed a discussion of space and time, with the book ending with a last part (VII) on Matter and Motion, chapters §53 to §59. In them Russell discusses what he calls “rational Dynamics as a branch of pure mathematics” (Russell 1903, §437). This rational Dynamics, would involve justifying many of the fundamental principles of physics with pure mathematics alone, from definitions that yield the geometry of space and time and the formal properties of its occupants, quantities of matter and energy. In this respect the construction of matter most resembles the construction of numbers as classes as an effort to replace the “theft” of postulating axioms with the “honest toil” of devising definitions that will validate those postulates. In the later project of constructing matter, from 1914 on, beginning with Our Knowledge of the External World (Russell 1914b), material objects come to be seen as collections of sense data, then of “sensibilia”. Sensibilia are potential objects of sensation, which, when perceived become “sense data” for the perceiver. Influenced by William James, Russell came to defend a neutral monism by which matter and minds were both to be constructed from sensibilia, but in different ways. Intuitively, the sense data occurring as they do “in” a mind, are material to construct that mind, the sense data derived from an object from different points of view to construct that object. Russell saw some support for this in the theory of relativity, and the fundamental importance of frames of reference in the new physics.