 In Principia Mathematica Russell’s multiple relation theory of judgment is introduced by presenting an ontological vision: The universe consists of objects having various qualities and standing in various relations. (Whitehead and Russell 1910–13, 43) Russell goes on to explain the multiple relation theory of judgment, which finds the place of propositions in this world of objects and qualities standing in relations. (See the entry on  propositions.) Russell’s multiple relation theory, that he held from 1910 to around 1919, argued that the constituents of propositions, say ‘Desdemona loves Cassio’, are unified in a way that does not make it the case that they constitute a fact by themselves. Those constituents occur only in the context of beliefs, say, ‘Othello judges that Desdemona loves Cassio’. The real fact consists of a relation of Belief holding between the constituents Othello, Desdemona, and Cassio; \(B(o,d,L,c)\). Because one might also have believed propositions of other structures, such as \(B(o,F,a)\) there need to be many such relations \(B\), of different “arities”, or number of arguments, hence the name “multiple relation” theory. Like the construction of numbers, this construction abstracts from what a number of occurrences of a belief have in common, namely, a relation between a believer and various objects in a certain order. The account also makes the proposition an incomplete symbol because there is no constituent in the analysis of ‘\(x\) believes that \(p\)’ that corresponds to ‘\(p\)’. As a result Russell concludes that: It will be seen that, according to the above account, a judgment does not have a single object, namely a proposition, but has several interrelated objects. That is to say, the relation which constitutes judgment is not a relation of two terms, namely the judging mind and the proposition, but is a relation of several terms, namely the mind and what we call the constituents of the proposition… Owing to the plurality of the objects of a single judgment, it follows that what we call a “proposition” (in which it is to be distinguished from the phrase expressing it) is not a single entity at all. That is to say, the phrase which expresses a proposition is what we call an “incomplete” symbol; it does not have meaning in itself, but requires some supplementation in order to acquire a complete meaning. (Whitehead and Russell 1910–13, 43–44) Although bound variables ranging over propositions hardly occur in Principia Mathematica (with a prominent exception in *14.3), it would seem that the whole theory of types is a theory of propositional functions. Yet following on the claim that propositions are “not single entities at all”, Russell says the same for propositional functions. In the Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Russell says that propositional functions are really “nothing”, but “nonetheless important for that” (Russell 1919, 96). This comment makes best sense if we think of propositional functions as somehow constructed by abstracting them from their values, which are propositions. The propositional function “\(x\) is human” is abstracted from its values “Socrates is human”, “Plato is human”, etc. Viewing propositional functions as constructions from propositions, that are in turn constructions by the multiple relation theory, helps to make sense of certain features of the theory of types of propositional functions in Principia Mathematica. We can understand how propositional functions seem to depend on their values, namely propositions, and how propositions in turn can themselves be logical constructions. The relation of this dependence to the theory of types is explained in the Introduction to Principia Mathematica in terms of the notion of “presupposing”: It would seem, however, that the essential characteristic of a function is ambiguity… We may express this by saying that “\(\phi x\)” ambiguously denotes \(\phi a, \phi b, \phi c,\) etc., where \(\phi a, \phi b, \phi c,\) etc. are the various values of “\(\phi x\).” … It will be seen that, according to the above account, the values of a function are presupposed by that function, not vice versa. It is sufficiently obvious, in any particular case, that a value of a function does not presuppose the function. Thus for example the proposition “Socrates is human” can be perfectly apprehended without regarding it as a value of the function “\(x\) is human.” It is true that, conversely, a function can be apprehended without its being necessary to apprehend its values severally and individually. If this were not the case, no function could be apprehended at all, since the number of values (true and false) of a function is necessarily indefinite and there are necessarily possible arguments with which we are not acquainted. (Russell 1910–13, 39–40) The notion of “incomplete symbol” seems less appropriate than “construction” in the case of propositional functions and propositions. To classify propositions and even propositional functions as instances of the same logical phenomenon as definite descriptions requires a considerable broadening of the notion. The ontological status of propositions and propositional functions within Russell’s logic, and in particular, in Principia Mathematica, is currently the subject of considerable debate. One interpretation, which we might call “realist,” is summarized in this footnote by Alonzo Church in his 1976 study of the ramified theory of types: Thus we take propositions as values of the propositional variables, on the ground that this is what is clearly demanded by the background and purpose of Russell’s logic, and in spite of what seems to be an explicit denial by Whitehead and Russell in PM, pp. 43–44. In fact, Whitehead and Russell make the claim: “that what we call a ‘proposition’ (in the sense in which this is distinguished from the phrase expressing it) is not a single entity at all. That is to say, the phrase which expresses a proposition is what we call an ‘incomplete symbol’ …” They seem to be aware that this fragmenting of propositions requires a similar fragmenting of propositional functions. But the contextual definition or definitions that are implicitly promised by the “incomplete symbol” characterization are never fully supplied, and it is in particular how they would explain away the use of bound propositional and functional variables. If some things that are said by Russell in IV and V of his Introduction to the second edition may be taken as an indication of what is intended, it is probable that the contextual definitions would not stand scrutiny. Many passages in [(Russell 1908)] and [(Whitehead and Russell 1910–13)] may be understood as saying or as having the consequence that the values of propositional functions are sentences. But a coherent semantics of Russell’s formalized language can hardly be provided on this basis (notice in particular, that, since sentences are also substituted for propositional variables, it would be necessary to take sentences as names of sentences.) And since the passages in question seem to involve confusions of use and mention or kindred confusions that may be merely careless, it is not certain that they are to be regarded as precise statements of a semantics. (Church 1976, n.4) Gregory Landini (1998) has proposed that there is indeed a coherent semantics for propositions and propositional functions in PM, which treats functions and propositions as linguistic entities. Landini proposes that this “nominalist semantics” is the intended interpretation of PM and is what remains of Russell’s earlier “substitutional theory.” He argues that Russell was led to this nominalism after first rejecting the reality of classes,then of propositional functions, and finally the reality of propositions. This rejection, according to Landini, leaves us with only a nominalist metaphysics of individuals and expressions as the interpretation of Russell’s logic. See also Cocchiarella (1980), who describes a “nominalist semantics” for ramified type theory, but rejects it as Russell’s intended interpretation. Sainsbury (1979) describes a “substitutional” interpretation of the quantifiers over propositional functions, but combines this with a truth-conditional semantics that does not require the ramification of the theory of types that is central to Russell’s interpretation in PM. Propositions and propositional functions are unlike definite descriptions and classes in that there are no explicit definitions of them in PM. It is unclear what it means to say that a symbol for a proposition, such as a variable \(p\) or \(q\), has “no meaning in isolation”, and that, however, the meaning can be given “in context”, as it would seem that there no definition is possible, it would seem, in a logic in which propositions and propositional functions appear as primitive notions in the statement of the axioms and definitions of logic.