 Consider the proposition that Vega is a star, which can figure in inferences like (8). Aristotle's logic focused on quantificational propositions; and as we shall see, this was prescient. But on his view, propositions like the conclusion of (8) still exemplify a subject-predicate structure that is shared by at least many of the sentences we used to express propositions. And one can easily formulate the schema ‘every S is P, and n is S; so n is P’, where the new lower-case variable is intended to range over proposition-parts of the sort indicated by names. (On some views, discussed below, a name like ‘Vega’ is a complex quantificational expression; though unsurprisingly, such views are tendentious.) Typically, a declarative sentence can be divided into a subject and a predicate: ‘Every star / is purple’, ‘Vega / is a star’, ‘Some politician / lied’, ‘The brightest planet / is visible tonight’, etc. Until quite recently, it was widely held that this grammatical division reflects a corresponding kind of logical structure: the subject of a proposition (i.e., what the proposition is about) is a target for predication. On this view, both ‘Every star’ and ‘Vega’ indicate subjects of propositions in (8), while ‘is’ introduces predicates. Aristotle would have said that in the premises of (8), being purple is predicated of every star, and being a star is predicated of Vega. Later theorists emphasized the contrast between general terms like ‘star’ and singular terms like ‘Vega’, while also distinguishing terms from syncategorematic expressions (e.g., ‘every’ and ‘is’) that can combine with terms to form complex subjects and predicates, including ‘will lie’, ‘can lie’, and ‘may have lied’. But despite the complications, it seemed clear that many propositions have the following canonical form: Subject-copula-Predicate; where a copula links a subject, which may consist of a quantifier and a general term, to a general term. Sentences like ‘Every star twinkles’ can be paraphrased with sentences like ‘Every star is a thing that does some twinkling’. This invites the suggestion that ‘twinkles’ is somehow an abbreviation for ‘is a thing that does some twinkling’, perhaps in the way that ‘bachelor’ is arguably short for ‘unmarried marriageable man’. The proposition that not only Vega twinkles, which seems to contain the proposition that Vega twinkles, presumably includes elements that are indicated with ‘only’ and ‘not’. Such examples invite the hypothesis that all propositions are composed of terms along with a relatively small number of syncategorematic elements, and that complex propositions can be reduced to canonical propositions that are governed by Aristotelian logic. This is not to say that all propositions were, or could be, successfully analyzed in this manner. But via this strategy, medieval logicians were able to describe many impeccable infererences as instances of valid forms. And this informed their discussions of how logic is related to grammar. Many viewed their project as an attempt to uncover principles of a mental language common to all thinkers. Aristotle had said, similarly, that spoken sounds symbolize “affections of the soul.” From this perspective, one expects a few differences between propositions and overt sentences. If ‘Every star twinkles’ expresses a proposition that contains a copula, then spoken languages mask certain aspects of logical structure. Ockham also held that a mental language would have no need for Latin's declensions, and that logicians could ignore such aspects of spoken language. The ancient Greeks were aware of sophisms like the following: that dog is a father, and that dog is yours; so that dog is your father. This bad inference cannot share its form with the superficially parallel but impeccable variant: that dog is a mutt, and that mutt is yours; so that dog is your mutt. (See Plato, Euthydemus 298 d-e.) So the superficial features of sentences are not infallible guides to the logical forms of propositions. Still, the divergence was held to be relatively minor. Spoken sentences have structure; they are composed, in systematic ways, of words. And the assumption was that sentences reflect the major aspects of propositional form, including a subject-predicate division. So while there is a distinction between the study of valid inference and the study of sentences used in spoken language, the connection between logic and grammar was thought to run deep. This suggested that the logical form of a proposition just is the grammatical form of some (perhaps mental) sentence.