 Brouwer studied at the (municipal) University of Amsterdam where his most important teachers were Diederik Korteweg and Gerrit Mannoury. Korteweg (1848–1941) was professor of mathematics, mechanics and astronomy at the University of Amsterdam from 1881–1918; the last five years as extraordinarius, so as to make place for Brouwer. Around 1900, Korteweg was the most important and influential mathematician in the Netherlands, and he contributed much to the internationalisation of Dutch mathematics. A mathematical physicist trained by van der Waals, he had a particular interest in mechanics and thermodynamics. Among his many results, the best-known is probably the Korteweg-de Vries equation, describing the behaviour of waves in a shallow channel. Korteweg also had a strong historical interest, and was chief editor of vols. XI–XV of Christiaan Huygens’ collected works (1908–1925). Part of the correspondence with his PhD student Brouwer concerned the unification of physical theories (see van Stigt, 1990, pp. 490–498). Mannoury (1867–1956) was a philosopher, mathematician, psychoanalyst, accountant, and political activist (Kirkels, 2019). Largely an autodidact, it was he who introduced in the Netherlands both topology (in a series of papers of 1897–1900) and Peano’s symbolic logic (in a lecture in 1903). In 1903 he was appointed privaatdocent (unpaid lecturer) in the logical foundations of mathematics at the University of Amsterdam, where Brouwer was among his first and most enthusiastic students. His lectures have been published, in shortened and revised form, as Mannoury, 1909. But it was Mannoury’s earlier, topological papers that influenced the young Brouwer decisively: the “undertone” of that work, Brouwer said in a speech in 1946, had changed his view of mathematics from a collection of “truths fascinating by their immovability, but horrifying by their lifelessness, like stones from barren mountains of disconsolate infinity” to a concern with what is “built ... out of the structural elements of our thinking” (Brouwer, 1946B, pp. 192–193). Brouwer was also very interested in Mannoury’s reflections on the uses and misuses of language in mathematics and philosophy. In 1917 Mannoury became professor extraordinarius, in 1918 ordinarius at the University of Amsterdam, succeeding Korteweg at the chair of analytic and descriptive geometry, mechanics and philosophy of mathematics, until 1937. A large part of his career was devoted to furthering the development of significs, an analysis of communicative acts starting from the ideas laid down by Victoria, Lady Welby in her paper “Sense, Meaning and Interpretation” (Welby, 1896). Brouwer was also involved in that project. Brouwer’s principal (intuitionistic) students were Maurits Belinfante, Arend Heyting, and Johan de Iongh; Heyting, in turn, was the teacher of Anne Troelstra and Dirk van Dalen, and de Iongh of Wim Veldman. Brouwer’s classes were also attended by Max Euwe, later to become world chess champion, who published a game-theoretical paper on chess from the intuitionistic point of view (Euwe, 1929), and who would much later deliver Brouwer’s funeral speech. Among Brouwer’s assistants were Heyting, Hans Freudenthal, Karl Menger, and Witold Hurewicz, the latter two of whom were not intuitionistically inclined. The most influential supporter of Brouwer’s intuitionism outside the Netherlands at the time was, for a number of years, Hermann Weyl (whose adaptation of intuitionistic analysis was not wholly coherent); also Husserl’s student Oskar Becker should be mentioned. Brouwer seems to have been an independent and brilliant man of high moral standards, but with an exaggerated sense of justice, making him at times pugnacious. As a consequence, in his life he energetically fought many battles. To Mannoury’s daughter, Brouwer once said: “Indeed, your father is one of the few people with whom I have never had a quarrel. But he brought out the good in people, and I the bad” (Schmitz, 1990, p. 383). From 1914 to 1928, Brouwer was member of the editiorial board of the Mathematische Annalen, and he was the founding editor of Compositio Mathematica, which first appeared in 1934. He was a member of, among others, the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences, the Royal Society in London, the Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften in Berlin, and the Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Brouwer received honorary doctorates from the universities of Oslo (1929) and Cambridge (1954), and was made Knight in the Order of the Dutch Lion in 1932.