 The following is a brief history of Brouwer’s ideas in philosophy, mathematics, and logic. There is also a more detailed separate article on  The Development of Intuitionistic Logic. Brouwer’s little book Life, Art and Mysticism of 1905, while not developing his foundations of mathematics as such, is a key to those foundations as developed in his dissertation on which he was working at the same time and which was finished two years later. Among a variety of other things, such as his views on society and women in particular, the book contains his basic ideas on mind, language, ontology and epistemology. These ideas are applied to mathematics in his dissertation On the Foundations of Mathematics, defended in 1907; it is the general philosophy and not the paradoxes that initiates the development of intuitionism (once this had begun, solutions to the paradoxes emerged). As did Kant, Brouwer founds mathematics on a pure intuition of time (but Brouwer rejects pure intuition of space). Brouwer holds that mathematics is an essentially languageless activity, and that language can only give descriptions of mathematical activity after the fact. This leads him to deny axiomatic approaches any foundational role in mathematics. Also, he construes logic as the study of patterns in linguistic renditions of mathematical activity, and therefore logic is dependent on mathematics (as the study of patterns) and not vice versa. It is these considerations that motivate him to introduce the distinction between mathematics and metamathematics (for which he used the term “second order mathematics”), which he would explain to Hilbert in conversations in 1909 (Brouwer, 1928A2, p. 375n.2). With this view in place, Brouwer sets out to reconstruct Cantorian set theory. When an attempt (in a draft of the dissertation) at making constructive sense out of Cantor’s second number class (the class of all denumerably infinite ordinals) and higher classes of even greater ordinals fails, he realises that this cannot be done and rejects the higher number classes, leaving only all finite ordinals and an unfinished or open-ended collection of denumerably infinite ordinals. Thus, as a consequence of his philosophical views, he consciously puts aside part of generally accepted mathematics. Soon he would do the same with a principle of logic, the principle of the excluded middle (PEM), but in the dissertation he still thinks of it as correct but useless, interpreting \(p \vee \neg p\) as \(\neg p \rightarrow \neg p\). In “The Unreliability of the Logical Principles” of 1908, Brouwer formulates, in general terms, his criticism of PEM: although in the simple form of \(p \vee \neg p\), the principle will never lead to a contradiction, there are instances of it for which one has, constructively speaking, no positive grounds. Brouwer names some. Because they do not in the strict sense refute PEM, they are known as “weak counterexamples”. See the supplement on Weak Counterexamples. The innovation that gives intuitionism a much wider range than other varieties of constructive mathematics (including the one in Brouwer’s dissertation) are the choice sequences. These are potentially infinite sequences of numbers (or other mathematical objects) chosen one after the other by the subject. Choice sequences made their first appearance as intuitionistically acceptable objects in a book review in 1914; the principle that makes them mathematically tractable, the continuity principle, was formulated in Brouwer’s lectures notes of 1916. The main use of choice sequences is the reconstruction of analysis; points on the continuum (real numbers) are identified with choice sequences satisfying certain conditions. Choice sequences are collected together using a device called  “spread”, which performs a function similar to that of the Cantorian set in classical analysis, and initially, Brouwer even uses the word “Menge” (“set”) for it. Brouwer develops a theory of spreads, and a theory of point sets based on it, in the two-part paper “Founding Set Theory Independently of the Principle of the Excluded Middle” (1918/1919). The answer to the question in the title of Brouwer’s paper “Does Every Real Number Have a Decimal Expansion?” (1921A) turns out to be no. Brouwer demonstrates that one can construct choice sequences satisfying the Cauchy condition that in their exact development depend on an as yet open problem. No decimal expansion can be constructed until the open problem is solved; on Brouwer’s strict constructivist view, this means that no decimal expansion exists until the open problem is solved. In this sense, one can construct real numbers (i.e., converging choice sequences) that do not yet have a decimal expansion. In a lecture in 1923, again using choice sequences and open problems, Brouwer devises a general technique, now known as “Brouwerian counterexamples”, to generate weak counterexamples to classical principles: “On the Significance of the Principle of the Excluded Middle in Mathematics” (Brouwer 1924N). The basic theorems of intuitionistic analysis — the bar theorem, fan theorem, and continuity theorem — are in “On the Domains of Definition of Functions” of 1927. The first two are structural theorems on spreads; the third (not to be confused with the continuity principle for choice sequences) states that every total function \([0,1] \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\) is continuous and even uniformly continuous. The fan theorem is, in fact, a corollary of the bar theorem; combined with the continuity principle, which is not classically valid, it yields the continuity theorem, which is not classically valid either. The bar and fan theorems on the other hand are classically valid, although the classical and intuitionistic proofs for them are not exchangeable. The classical proofs are intuitionistically not acceptable because of the way they depend on PEM; the intuitionistic proofs are classically not acceptable because they depend on reflection on the structure of mental proofs. In this reflection, Brouwer introduced the notion of the “fully analysed” or “canonical” form of a proof, which would be adopted much later by Martin-Löf and by Dummett. In a footnote, Brouwer mentions that such proofs, which he identifies with mental objects in the subject’s mind, are often infinite. “Intuitionist Reflections on Formalism” of 1928 identifies and discusses four key differences between formalism and intuitionism, all having to do either with the role of PEM or with the relation between mathematics and language. Brouwer emphasises, as he had done in his dissertation, that formalism presupposes contentual mathematics at the metalevel. He also here presents his first strong counterexample, a refutation of PEM in the form \(\forall x\in \mathbb{R}(Px \vee \neg Px)\), by showing that it is false that every real number is either rational or irrational. See the supplement on  Strong Counterexamples. Of the two lectures held in Vienna in 1928 — “Mathematics, Science and Language” (1929A) and “The Structure of the Continuum” (1930A) — the first is for the most part of a philosophical nature while the second is more mathematical. In “Mathematics, Science and Language”, Brouwer states his general views on the relations between the three subjects mentioned in the title, following a genetic approach, and stressing the role of the will. A longer version of this lecture was published as “Will, Knowledge and Speech” (1933A2); it contains the first explicit remarks about a notion that had been present from the start, now known as that of the “ideal(ised) mathematician” or “creating subject”. “Consciousness, Philosophy and Mathematics” (1949C) once again goes through Brouwer’s philosophy of mind and some of its consequences for mathematics. Comparison with Life, Art, and Mysticism, “Mathematics, Science and Language”, and “Volition, Knowledge, Language” reveals that Brouwer’s general philosophy over the years developed considerably, but mainly in depth. In 1949, Brouwer (1949A) publishes the first of a new class of strong counterexamples, a class that differs from Brouwer’s earlier strong counterexample (1928, see above) in that the type of argument, which now goes by the name of “creating subject argument”, involves essential reference to the temporal structure of the creating subject’s mathematical activity (Heyting, 1956, chs. III and VIII; van Atten, 2003, chs.4 and 5; van Atten, 2018). Brouwer’s example shows that there is a case where the double negation principle in the form of \(\forall x\in \mathbb{R}(\neg \neg Px \rightarrow Px)\), leads to a contradiction (“The Non-equivalence of the Constructive and the Negative Order Relation on the Continuum”, in Dutch). The first publication of a strong counterexample in English had to wait till 1954, in “An Example of Contradictority in Classical Theory of Functions” (1954F). This polemical title should be understood as follows: if one keeps to the letter of the classical theory but in its interpretation substitutes intuitionistic notions for their classical counterparts, one arrives at a contradiction. So it is not a counterexample in the strict sense of the word, but rather a non-interpretability result. As intuitionistic logic is, formally speaking, part of classical logic, and intuitionistic arithmetic is part of classical arithmetic, the existence of strong counterexamples must depend on an essentially non-classical ingredient, and this is of course the choice sequences. The creating subject argument is, after the earlier introduction of choice sequences and the proof of the bar theorem, a new step in the exploitation of the subjective aspects of intuitionism. There is no principled reason why it should be the last.