 Perhaps the term with the most varied history is ‘appellatio’, though even so, one can discern a common thread running through it. It starts, we saw, as an equivalent of ‘nominatio’ in Anselm and Abelard, and by the thirteenth century is used to pick out the present extension of a term, that of which it can be truly predicated in the present tense: “So now one should know that appellation is spoken of in four ways … In the fourth way, appellation is said to be the acceptance of a term for a suppositum or supposita existing actually, and our present focus is on appellation spoken of in this fourth way” (Lambert, tr. Maloney pp.  261–2).[34]  In Burley, at the turn of the fourteenth century, it almost usurps the place of ‘copulatio’, being for him the relation of the predicate to its inferiors: “Thus, just as supposition taken strictly is a property of the subject insofar as it is matched with the predicate, so appellation is a property of the predicate matched with the subject or with an inferior” (tr. Spade p.  131).[35]  There are shades too, of Abelard: “a univocal general term appellates its inferiors but does not signify  them”.[36]  But the crucial phrase which runs through the history of the term appears here too: “the predicate appellates its form” (De Puritate, p. 48: “praedicatum appellat suam formam”). What he says he means by this is that the predicate be truly predicable at some time, in the present tense, of the supposita of the subject. It is ampliation and restriction which distinguish this property of the predicate from properties of the subject. For, on the standard account, as we saw above, ‘A white thing was black’ is true only if ‘black’ has been truly predicable of the supposita of the subject, namely, of what is or was white. In contrast, ‘A white thing is black’ may never have been true – indeed, in this case, it never will have since it is self-contradictory. So the subject does not always “appellate its form”. A consequence pointed out by John Buridan, among  others,[37]  is that conversion needs application with care in such cases. Consider ‘The just will be justly damned’: this can be true, if those who are just sin in the future. But ‘Justly will the just be damned’ is false, for ‘Justly are the just damned’ will never be true. Similarly, ‘Socrates approaching you know’ can be true while ‘You know Socrates approaching’ (the “hooded man” fallacy from Aristotle's De Sophisticis Elenchis 179b1–3) may be false (for you know Socrates, but do not recognize him approaching). It is explained by reason of the fact that the predicate appellates its form (for ‘You know Socrates approaching’ requires that the predicate ‘know Socrates approaching’ be true of you and so is false), whereas ‘Socrates approaching you know’ requires only that ‘Him you know’ be true, referring to Socrates, and it is true. The doctrine of appellation could thus be used to diagnose familiar fallacies. Scott, in his discussion of Buridan's treatment of the sophism, ‘You know the one approaching’ (pp. 42–9), claims that Buridan's concept of appellation (which he misleadingly translates as ‘connotation’) in his diagnosis is novel, and Spade follows him in his commentary on Peter of Ailly (p.109 n.188). But the notion is clearly continuous with Burley's in that ‘appellating its form’ requires true predication via a demonstration. Indeed, it is continuous with Lambert's usage, for ‘chimera’ has no appellata precisely because ‘hoc est chimera’ (‘This is a chimera’) is false whatever is demonstrated. Admittedly, Buridan explicitly restricts appellation to appellative terms, that is, “every term connoting something other than what it supposits for” (Summulae de Dialectica: Treatise on Suppositions, tr. Klima, p. 291), and it “appellates that which it connotes as pertaining to that which it supposits for”. Thus ‘white’ connotes whiteness and supposits for white things. What appears to be novel in Buridan is the extension of the doctrine to intentional verbs, which, says Buridan (and Albert), cause the terms following them (the predicate, or part of the predicate) to appellate their rationes, that is, the concepts by which they signify what they do. Thus in ‘You know Socrates approaching’, the expression ‘Socrates approaching’ appellates its concept, the ratio ‘Socrates approaching’, and so the proposition is false unless you are aware who it is; whereas in ‘Socrates approaching you know’, the subject ‘Socrates approaching’ appellates its concept only under disjunction to the rationes of other possible substituents in the same grammatical position, and so it suffices that ‘Him you know’ be true, where ‘him’ refers to Socrates under some concept or  other.[38]