 Some words have the effect of widening or narrowing the supposition of other terms in a proposition. For example, by qualifying ‘man’ with the adjective ‘white’, we restrict the supposition of ‘man’ in ‘A white man is running’ to white men; while a verb in the past tense ampliates the supposition of the subject to include what were its supposita. For example, ‘A white thing was black’ means that something which is now white or was white in the past was black. Lambert of Auxerre is typical in describing the many aspects of a proposition which can produce ampliation or restriction. Some are natural, as when ‘rational’ restricts ‘animal’ to supposit only for men by being adjoined to it; other cases are ‘usualis’ – ‘use-governed’ in Maloney's translation (p. 278): when we say ‘The king is coming’, we are taken to mean the king of the country where we are, so ‘king’ is restricted to supposit only for that king. Some ampliation and restriction is effected by consignification, that is, by an aspect of a word – by the tense of the verb, or by the gender of an adjective: in ‘homo alba’, the feminine ending of ‘alba’ restricts ‘homo’ to supposit only for women, indeed, white women. Other ampliation and restriction is effected by the signification of words – as in the case of ‘rational animal’ just mentioned, or in ‘Socrates' donkey’, where the possessive restricts ‘donkey’ to supposit only for Socrates' donkeys. Peter of Spain (ed. Copenhaver, p. 441) notes that only general terms can be ampliated or restricted, and only terms having personal supposition. Just as the past tense ampliates the subject to include past as well as present supposita, modal verbs ampliate the subject to possible supposita, as do verbs such as ‘understand’, ‘believe’, and indeed, notes Albert of Saxony, verbal nouns ending in ‘-bile’: ‘possible’, ‘audible’, ‘credible’, ‘capable of laughter’ and so on. Albert realises that even ‘supposit’ ampliates the subject: when we say ‘This term supposits for something’, what it supposits for need not actually exist, but might be past, future, possible or merely intelligible. According to Buridan, ‘must’ ampliates for possible supposita, for ‘A must be B’ means ‘It is not possible that A not be B’, contradictories must clearly ampliate in the same way, and ‘It is possible that A not be B’ ampliates for possibilia. Ampliation over possibles means care is needed in inferences from ‘is’ to ‘can’: ‘A can be B’ need not follow from ‘A is B’, for ‘A can be B’ means that what is or can be A can be B, and even if A is B, not everything which can be A might be capable of being B. For example, ‘Every planet lighting our hemisphere can be the sun’ is false even though it is in fact the sun which lights it, since the moon might light our hemisphere but the moon cannot be the  sun.[30] It is an interesting fact that almost alone among terminist logicians, Ockham does not speak of ampliation and restriction. (See Priest and Read 1981.) The reason appears to be that he disagrees with the truth-condition given above for ‘A white thing was black’, and similar cases. This proposition, he says, is ambiguous. Rather than meaning that what is or was white was black, it equivocates between ‘What is white was black’ and ‘What was black was white’: “in the case of every proposition of the past and of the future in which the subject is a general term or a demonstrative pronoun with a general term or a discrete term referring to some composite, we must distinguish [two  senses]”.[31]  Whether Ockham realized that his theory improved on the ampliative theory is unclear; nonetheless, his account seems to accord better with intuition. For the ampliative account is disjunctive: it says that the proposition is true if either what was white was black or what is white was black. Then it is true if either disjunct is true; whereas on Ockham's account it has two different senses, and can be false on one while true on the other – true because something now white used to be black but false if nothing which used to be white was ever black. For a clearer case, take the first sex-change operation – for the first time, say, a woman was a man. But no one who was a woman had ever been a man, so it was (also) false that a woman was a man. The proposition ‘A woman was a man’ is ambiguous and “est distinguenda ” (i.e., different senses must be distinguished, one true, one false). Ockham also eschews talk of ampliation in giving his account of modal propositions. Does ‘A white thing can be black’ mean that what is or can be white can be black, i.e., that either what is white can be black or what can be white can be black, as the ampliative account demands? – cf., e.g., Albert of Saxony: “For ‘A white thing can be black’ signifies that what is white or what can be white can be black” (my  translation).[32]  No, for this loses the sense in which it is self-contradictory to suggest that it is possible that a white thing be black. The proposition is ambiguous, in one sense self-contradictory, in the other true, Ockham notes (Summa Logicae II 10), because ‘This is black’ can be true if uttered pointing to something white: “‘A white thing can be black’ is true, because ‘This is black’ is possible, pointing to something for which ‘white’ supposits; but ‘A white thing is black’ is  impossible”.[33]