 Lambert of Auxerre (tr. Maloney, p. 290) speaks explicitly of relation as a property of terms, but most authors describe the phenomenon as the supposition of relatives. The relation in question is that between anaphoric terms and their antecedents. Most treatises consist of a repetition of a standard taxonomy: there are relatives of substance and relatives of accident, relatives of identity and relatives of diversity. For example, relatives of substance and of identity are ‘who’, ‘he’, ‘his’, and among these, reciprocal relatives such as ‘himself’; of diversity are ‘another’ and ‘someone else’. The latter are said to refer back (referre, past participle relatum) to their antecedent but to supposit for something different, as in, e.g., ‘Socrates is running and someone else is debating’. Relatives of accident include, first, those of identity, ‘such as’, ‘like’, ‘when’, and those of diversity, ‘in another way’, ‘other’; in, say, ‘Socrates is running and Plato is other’, ‘other’ refers back to ‘running’; in what way it differs will depend on the author's account of predicates. In contrast to the extensive taxonomy, medieval discussions of relatives before the mid-fourteenth century seem rather short on theory, dealing with puzzles more by common sense and description than in any unified way. For example, the prevailing view is that relatives of identity preserve the supposition of their antecedent. Why, then, can they usually not replace the antecedent? Consider, e.g., ‘Every man sees himself’. Does ‘himself’ have the same supposition as ‘man’ (or ‘every man’) and if so, why can the antecedent not replace it? – for ‘Every man sees every man’ has a very different signification. Lambert (tr. Maloney, p. 299) claims that in the case of reciprocal relatives the reciprocal pronoun can replace the antecedent unless the antecedent is taken universally, as here. In this case, it still supposits for the same as its antecedent, but in a different way, namely, discretely. Ockham spells it out: “in ‘Every man sees himself’, ‘himself’ supposits for every man by means of confused and distributive mobile supposition: but it does this singularly since it is not possible to descend without altering the other extreme … thus, ‘Every man sees himself, therefore, Socrates sees Socrates’” (tr. Loux p.  218).[39] Ockham claims that, although non-reciprocal relatives of identity always supposit for that for which their antecedent supposits, those whose antecedent is a general term occurring with personal supposition can never be replaced by their antecedent and result in an equivalent proposition. For example, ‘A man runs and he disputes’ is not convertible with ‘A man runs and a man disputes’. Buridan has two rules to explain what is happening (Summulae, tr. Klima pp. 283–4): Hence, in e.g., ‘Man is a species and it is predicable of many’, or ‘Socrates runs and he disputes’, the relative can be replaced without loss of meaning by its antecedent. But in ‘A man runs and he disputes’, it cannot, for the supposition would change. ‘He’ supposits only for men who are running, whereas ‘a man’, if it replaced it, would supposit for all men. Another issue concerned identifying the contradictory of a proposition containing a relative. A categorical containing a relative of identity such as ‘A, which is B, is C’ is equivalent to ‘A is B and A is C’. Hence its contradictory, ‘A, which is B, is not C’, says Albert of Saxony, is equivalent to ‘A is not B or A is not C’: “The second rule: a negative categorical proposition in which a relative term occurs is equivalent to a disjunctive proposition: e.g., ‘Socrates, who is running, is not disputing’ has the same truth-value as ‘Socrates is not running or Socrates is not disputing’. And therefore such a proposition has two causes of truth, each of which is sufficient on its own for its truth. Hence ‘Socrates, who is running, is not disputing’ is true either because Socrates is not running or because Socrates is not disputing. Hence because by the first rule the affirmative is equivalent to a conjunction, it follows that the negative contradictory to it is equivalent to a disjunction composed from the contradictories of the conjuncts, since conjunctions and disjunctions with contradictory parts contradict one  another”.[40]