 When psychology first began to emerge as an experimental science, in  the philosophy departments of the German universities in the late  19th century, and soon after in the United States, the central role  of imagery in mental life was not in question. For these pioneering  experimentalists, such as Wilhelm Wundt in Germany and William James  in America, mental images (often, following the established usage of  the Empiricist philosophical tradition, referred to as  ideas) held just the same central place in the explanation  of cognition that they had held for philosophical psychologists of  earlier times. Edward B. Titchener, a student of Wundt who  established himself as a leading figure in American psychology, was  particularly interested in imagery, and an experiment performed by  one of his students, C.W. Perky, has become particularly well known.  It is often assumed that it shows that there is no  qualitative experiential difference between mental images and  percepts, but further experimental investigations have raised some  doubts about this conclusion (see   Supplement: The Perky Experiment). However, developments within psychology at the beginning of the 20th  century began to cast doubt on this long established consensus. A  group of psychologists working in Würzburg, Germany, lead by  another former student of Wundt's, Oswald Külpe, claimed to have found empirical evidence that certain conscious thought contents are  neither imaginal nor perceptual in character. Their results were  challenged on several grounds by Wundt, Titchener and others, and  were certainly never definitively established. Nevertheless, the  bitter dispute that ensued, the so called imageless thought  controversy, had a profound effect on the development of scientific  psychology (and, very arguably, philosophy too). Most psychologists  became, in effect, profoundly disillusioned with the whole notion of  mental imagery, and either avoided seriously considering the topic,  treated it dismissively, or, in some extreme cases, denied the  existence of the phenomenon outright. These attitudes noticeably  influenced other disciplines, including philosophy. Although the  psychological study of imagery revived with the rise of cognitivism  in the 1960s and 70s, when new experimental techniques were developed that enabled a truly experimental study of the phenomenon, current  views about, and attitudes towards, mental imagery cannot be properly understood without an awareness of this history, versions of which,  of varying degrees of accuracy, have passed into the folklore of  psychology. The following supplements discuss ideas and research about  imagery in early (late 19th and early 20th century) scientific  psychology: Supplement: Founders of Experimental Psychology: Wilhelm Wundt and William James Supplement: Edward B. Titchener: The Complete Iconophile Supplement: The Perky Experiment Perhaps Wundt's most important German student was Oswald Külpe,  who had for several years served as Wundt's assistant professor, but  eventually left to set up his own laboratory in the philosophy  department of Würzburg University. He and his students there  developed a direct challenge to the prevalent imagery theory of  thought. Under the influence of both Machian positivism and, later,  the act psychology of Brentano and the phenomenology of Husserl,  Külpe, like Titchener (whom he had helped train), rejected what  he saw as Wundt's unnecessarily strict methodological restrictions on the scope of empirical science, and encouraged his students to extend the scope of the introspective method to the study of the  “higher” processes of thought and reasoning (Danziger,  1979, 1980; Ash, 1998). In 1901, two of these students, Mayer and  Orth, performed a word association experiment in which subjects were  asked to report everything that had passed through their mind between hearing the stimulus word and giving the response. Note that it was  normal practice, in this era of psychology, for experimental  subjects, or observers as they were more often called, to be drawn from among fellow researchers within the same laboratory, often including the supervising professor. Present day psychologists would, with good reason, suspect such subjects of being liable to produce  results strongly biased by theoretical preconceptions (Orne, 1962;  Intons-Peterson, 1983). Great pains are usually taken, today, to  ensure that subjects in psychological experiments have no idea what  hypothesis the experiment is supposed to be testing. In 1901 however, it was thought that experienced and knowledgeable observers  were more likely to produce consistent and meaningful results than  the psychologically untrained. In the case of the Meyer and Orth  experiment, two amongst the four subjects were Meyer and Orth  themselves. Nevertheless, they professed to be surprised by some of  their findings. In particular: The jargon term bewusstseinslagen (“states of  consciousness” — Humphrey, 1951) was coined to designate  these indescribable non-sensorial states, and they soon began to turn up in more and more profusion in the introspective reports generated  in the Würzburg laboratory, taking on an increasing theoretical  significance as time went by. In 1905 another Würzburg  researcher, Ach, also introduced the largely overlapping, but more  explicitly intentionalistic concept of bewusstheit or  “awareness”, an unanalysable “impalpably given  ‘knowing’” (Ach, quoted and translated by Humphrey, 1951), and by 1907, Karl Bühler, perhaps the most radical of  Külpe's students, was simply referring to gedanken  (“thoughts”). Bühler's experiments might, for  example, involve giving a subject (often professor Külpe  himself) a somewhat gnomic sentence to interpret (e.g.,  “Thinking is so extraordinarily difficult that many prefer to  judge”) and then collecting introspective reports of the  conscious, but allegedly non-imaginal, gedanken that had  occurred between the hearing of the sentence and the giving of the  interpretation. Although the Würzburg school never denied that  imagery does occur, by this time the greater part of the conscious  contents of minds examined in Würzburg seemed to be  non-imaginal. Unsurprisingly, Wundt, and others, refused to accept these new  methods and conclusions, and a heated debate, the so called  imageless thought controversy, ensued. Though Wundt was  surely skeptical of the existence of imageless thoughts, his primary  criticisms were methodological. He was very much concerned with the  fact that the experiments were necessarily constructed so that the  introspective reports were given after the completion of the experimental task (word association, sentence interpretation, or  whatever). The Würzburg research thus involved discursive  recollection (or was it reconstruction?) of conscious contents that  were no longer present to the mind. Such experiments, Wundt argued,  were open invitations to suggestion, and, indeed, were Titchener (see   supplement)  also strongly objected to the alleged demonstrations of imageless  thought, but for different reasons. He did not object to the aims or  the introspective methodology of the Würzburg school, but to  their purported results, and, for him, the experiments were not so  much misconceived as incompetently executed: In particular, he felt,  the observers (experimental subjects) in Würzburg had  been inadequately trained in the art of introspection. According to  Titchener, the main pitfall of introspection was what he called the  “stimulus error,” the strong tendency to confound the  conscious experience itself with whatever it might represent. Thus,  to report, when looking at a rectangular table top, that one  experiences a rectangle, would be to commit the stimulus error: The  “real” conscious content would (on Titchener's view) have the trapezoidal shape that the table top projects upon the retina.  For Titchener, the intentionality generally ascribed to imageless thoughts was clear evidence that the Würzburg introspectors were committing the stimulus error systematically: They were not  reporting the intrinsic nature of their conscious contents, but what  those contents signified. Titchener suggested that the purported  bewusstseinslagen etc. were, in fact, faint and fleeting  kinaesthetic sensations, feelings of muscular tension and the like  (Tweney, 1987). In Titchener's own laboratory, experiments quite  similar to those done in Würzburg, but carried out using  introspective observers well trained in avoiding the  stimulus error (Titchener himself, or his own graduate students),  produced no reports of imageless thoughts. Instead, they found the  fleeting imagery or the subtle bodily sensations that Professor  Titchener's theory predicted (Titchener, 1909; Humphrey, 1951). This work of Titchener's (like other responses to the imageless  thought controversy from America, Britain, and elsewhere) had  relatively little impact in Germany, which, with some justification  at that time, still regarded itself as very much preeminent in  psychological science. Nevertheless, on both sides of the Atlantic  the controversy was recognized as touching on deep foundational  issues in the science of mind. Although largely forgotten today, it  seems to have had a lasting impact on the development not only of  psychology, but philosophy as well. The Würzburg school's  claims, despite their shaky basis, undoubtedly contributed to a sense that imagery could not be so psychologically important as had  traditionally been assumed, and that an alternative way of thinking  about cognitive content was needed. Many psychologists and  philosophers of this era came, partly for this reason, to feel that  thought should be understood in terms of language per se,  and that it was a serious mistake ever to have believed that the  representational power of language derives from some more fundamental form of representation, such as mental   imagery.[20] But the imageless thought controversy was never satisfactorily resolved, at least in the terms in which it was originally posed. Indeed, philosophers are still arguing over the issues involved (e.g., Lormand, 1996; Mangan, 2001; Pitt, 2004; Robinson, 2005).  Although the Würzburg school has been lauded for drawing psychology's attention to the intentionality of mental contents, and for the introduction of once important concepts such as “mental set” into the science, it would certainly be grossly misleading to suggest that their work provides evidence for the existence of non-sensorial conscious mental contents (i.e. imageless thoughts) that comes anywhere close to meeting present day scientific standards. Indeed, the fact that Külpe's and Titchener's laboratories each produced results that fitted their directors' contrasting preconceptions did not go unnoticed by their contemporaries. The irresolvable dispute contributed significantly to a growing sense of intellectual crisis within psychology, leading to a deep loss of confidence (persisting to the present – see Schwitzgebel (2002a,b, 2008)) in the scientific value of introspection. It also led to a precipitous decline in scientific interest in imagery, especially in the United States after the Behaviorist movement took hold. On the one hand its importance in the cognitive economy (or even its very existence) was now subject to doubt; on the other hand it had come to seem that it was very difficult, if not impossible, to study it experimentally and objectively. Further discussion of the consequences of the imageless  thought controversy: Supplement: European Responses: Jaensch, Freud, and Gestalt Psychology Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery By the early 20th century, particularly in the United States, where  it most flourished, psychology had progressively established a  disciplinary identity distinct from the parent discipline of  philosophy. However, interest in and attitudes towards imagery  amongst philosophers followed a very similar trajectory to that seen  in psychology. Early in the century, philosophers as otherwise  diverse as Russell (1919, 1921) and Bergson (1907) still gave imagery a key role in their theories of meaning and cognition (although it  may be significant that Bergson seems to regard what he called the  “cinematic” imagery-based thought of  “ordinary” and “intellectual” cognition as  distinctly inferior to the non-imaginal philosophical  intuition that also played a large role in his epistemology).  However, before long, and especially in the wake of the imageless  thought controversy, doubts were beginning to emerge, in the work of  philosophers such as Schlick (1918), Sartre (1936, 1940), Ryle  (1949), and especially the later Wittgenstein, both about imagery's  importance in cognition, and about whether the whole notion of  “pictures in the mind” really made sense. Indeed, even in the late 19th century Frege (1884 §§59–60)  had already argued against the traditional view that the  meaningfulness of language derives from the mental images that we  associate with words. Images, he pointed out, are subjective and  idiosyncratic, whereas word meanings are objective and universal.  However, the almost unanimous scorn with which the imagery theory of  meaning was regarded by late 20th century analytic philosophers seems mainly to be due to the influence and arguments of the later  Wittgenstein (Candlish, 2001; Nyíri, 2001). Today, it is  largely thanks to Wittgenstein's efforts that, In fact, Wittgenstein implicitly rejected the imagery theory of  meaning even in his early work – the so called “picture  theory of meaning” of the Tractatus (Wittgenstein,  1922) is not a version of the imagery theory – but an  explicit critique appears only in his posthumously published later  writings (although the arguments were already influential during his  lifetime, long before they saw print). Perhaps the most sustained  critique of the imagery theory of meaning occurs in the opening pages of The Blue and Brown Books (Wittgenstein,1958), although  the pithier remarks in the Philosophical Investigations  (1953 – especially §139f) may have been more influential.  Many other remarks and arguments scattered through Wittgenstein's  other posthumously published writings, particularly in  Zettel (1967), the Remarks on the Philosophy of  Psychology (1980a, 1980b), and the Last Writings on the  Philosophy of Psychology (1990), demonstrate that he was  fascinated by imagery, but deeply skeptical not only about the large  cognitive role traditionally assigned to it, but also about the  traditional understanding of the image as a sort of inner picture  (see, e.g. 1953 I §301, II pp. 196e & 213e). No-one could seriously doubt that Wittgenstein himself recognized the experiential reality and philosophical importance of imagery: he  expends so much effort wrestling with the concept. Nevertheless, as  Nyíri (2001) remarks, “Wittgenstein's untiring endeavor  [is] to relegate mental images to a merely secondary place.” He determinedly rejected the traditional empiricist view that thinking  is primarily a play of images, that language is semantically grounded in imagery, and that the principal role of language is to communicate the results of our inner, imaginal thought processes to others.  Instead, Wittgenstein regarded language itself as the preeminent  vehicle of thought, and he held that the meanings of linguistic  expressions arise from the various uses to which they are  put. He thus saw no need (and no room) for language to be  semantically grounded in any other form of representation. In support of this position, he strove to show that imagery (the only real  candidate for the job) could not possibly be the semantic ground of  language, and he is very widely believed to have succeeded. The two themes of the cognitive unimportance of imagery and its  non-pictorial nature were taken up, and argued more fully, by  numerous post-Wittgensteinian philosophers in the latter half of the  twentieth century. Although there may be some tension between the  themes (most arguments against the imagery theory of thought and  meaning seem to turn upon mental images being, in some sense,  picture-like) in practice they have rarely, if ever, come into  conflict; rather, both have played their part in setting the  iconophobic tone of the era. Even in the wake of the revival of scientific interest in the cognitive roles of imagery in the 1960s and 70s, the handful of post-Wittgensteinian philosophers who have attempted to defend imagery-based theories of thought and meaning (Price, 1953; Lowe, 1995, 1996; Ellis, 1995; Nyíri, 2001) still find themselves swimming very much against the tide. Philosophers such as Harrison (1962–3), Goodman (1968), and Fodor (1975) have reinforced, restated and extended Wittgenstein's arguments for the irrelevance of imagery to semantics, and have made a powerful and influential case. One point that is often made is that there seems to be no natural way of representing certain linguistically expressible concepts in an image. Logical relations are often mentioned in this context. It is hard to see, for example, how it might be possible to form a mental image of not (is any image in which John does not appear an image of John is not here?), or or (how would an image of A or B differ from one of A and B?), or if…then (see Barsalou (1999) for some tentative suggestions in rebuttal). The image theory of linguistic meaning might seem to be on its  strongest ground when it is applied to nouns (or, at least, concrete  nouns). On the face of things, it is plausible to think that one  understands the meaning of the word 'dog' if and only if as the word  is able to arouse an image of a dog in one's mind. Berkeley's  argument against general ideas had long brought this simple picture  into question, however (see   section 2.3.3).  Can my mental picture of a dog represent any dog, or dogs in general, or is it, at best, just a representation of Rover? Twentieth century philosophers, however, would soon point to an even  deeper problem. They assumed, probably often correctly, that the  traditional image theory of meaning was based upon the assumption  that images themselves get their meaning through resembling  their objects: an image of a dog represents a dog because it  resembles or looks like a dog, in the same way that a  painting of Queen Elizabeth represents Queen Elizabeth because it  looks like her. This resemblance theory of  representation is not always explicitly stated by image  theorists of thought and language (perhaps it is thought to be too  obvious to be worth saying, or perhaps not all of them are really  committed to it), but Russell (1919,1921), for one, explicitly takes  the view that words represent because they are associated with mental images, and that the images themselves represent because they  resemble their objects. This resemblance theory became the main focus of  attack. Consider a photograph of Leo the lion. It would certainly be  reasonable to say both that it resembles and that it represents him.  But now suppose we have two such photographs. Each photo resembles  the other more than either resemble Leo (both photos are small,  rectangular pieces of card, with a white border around a gray or  vari-colored rectangle, and neither is carnivorous or furry), yet we  would normally want to say that they each represent Leo, and not that they represent each other. Of course, a photograph of Leo does  resemble him, when the right aspects of resemblance are considered,  but in this regard Leo equally resembles the photograph. We are  unlikely, however, to want to say that he represents the  photo. Resemblance is a symmetrical relationship, and representation  is not. None of this necessarily means that resemblance never plays  any role in representation, but in order for it to do so, the  relevant aspects of resemblance have to be recognized, and  the resembling object has to be used (or, at least,  taken) as a representation. But surely, before a cognitive  system can recognize or use the relevant aspects of resemblance  between a photograph (or an inner quasi-picture) and an object (or a  percept), it must already be able to represent the picture and its  object, and their various features, to itself. The mind's power to  recognize resemblance seemingly depends on its power to represent  things, rather than vice-versa. On grounds such as this, Goodman  (1968) argued that even physical pictures – paintings drawings, photographs, etc. – do not represent their subjects  because they resemble them. Indeed, he held that what a  picture represents is just as much a matter of interpretation and  convention as is what a word or sentence represents, the implication  being that pictorial representation is no more “natural”  or fundamental, no more a “ground” for meaning, than  linguistic representation itself. Clearly the argument applies to  mental pictures quite as much as to physical ones. Fodor (1975), borrowing liberally from the Wittgenstein of the  Philosophical Investigations (1953 §139 f.), made a  compelling case that mental pictures cannot be the foundational  bearers of intentionality because what they resemble is too  indeterminate (cf. Goodman, 1970). A mental image of John, who is a  tall fat man, might mean John, it might mean fat  man (or John is a fat man), or tall man, or  just man, human being, or even physical  object. On the other hand it might mean John in just the  particular pose and situation in which he is imagined. After  all, it resembles all those things (and indefinitely many more). What an image means, according to Fodor, what it is an image of,  will necessarily remain radically indeterminate unless it is pinned  down by an associated linguistic description. Fodor himself holds  that what our mental images represent is determined by an associated  description couched in mentalese, an innate, unconscious,  computational “language of thought” (Fodor, 1975) (see:   language of thought hypothesis);  others, such as Kaufmann (1980), apparently think that the necessary  descriptions may be couched in the natural language that the imager  speaks. On either view, though, the traditional semantic dependency  is inverted. Instead of the meaningfulness of language being grounded in imagery, the meaningfulness of imagery seems to need grounding in  some sort of language. Arguments against the pictorial nature of imagery, which are scarcely more than hinted at in Wittgenstein's published works, were developed much more explicitly by Ryle (1949). As part of a broader (and very influential) attack on what he called “Descartes' myth” (i.e., Cartesian dualism), Ryle argued that the notion of private, non-physical, mental pictures is an absurdity, and proposed instead that “imagining”, “seeing in the mind's eye”, and so forth, is better understood as akin to pretending (to ourselves) to experience ordinary, external things. Other philosophers influenced by both Wittgenstein and Ryle soon carried forward this critique of the inner picture: Shorter (1952) and Dennett (1969) (in some respects anticipating the work of Pylyshyn (1973) – see section  4.4.1  below, and especially  note 31)  suggested that imagery might be more akin to describing or depicting something to oneself, rather than to pretending to see it; and, from a detailed exegesis of Ryle's arguments, Ishiguro (1966, 1967) developed a theory of mental images as intentional objects (in the sense of Anscombe (1965)) having a merely “grammatical” existence: Although the grammar of our language may sometimes make it very awkward to refer to our imagery experiences without seeming to imply that they are caused by certain entities (mental images), it does not follow that such entities actually exist. Although expressed in very different terms, Ishiguro's position on  imagery is not altogether unlike the view developed earlier in the  century by Sartre (1940). (See Ryle (1971) for an interesting  comparison of his own views about the mental, including mental  imagery, to views in the phenomenological tradition, to which Sartre  belonged.) Under the influence of Husserl rather than Wittgenstein,  Sartre also stressed the intentionality of imagery and denied that  mental images (conceived as entities) exist: It is important to be clear that just because Sartre (and Ryle,  Shorter, Ishiguro, and others) hold that mental images are not inner  pictures, nor even, indeed, any sort of entity, they are not thereby  denying that people have quasi-perceptual experiences, or even that  these may sometimes be very vivid. Unfortunately, perhaps because the notion that such experiences are caused by inner pictures is so  entrenched in our folk psychology, this point does not always seem to have been clear to critics of such views, and it has even been  occasionally suggested that they could not possibly be held by anyone personally familiar with the experience of   imagery.[21]  However, a careful reading of these apparently iconophobic authors  soon reveals that they in no way intend to deny the experiential  reality of imagery, and most of them make their personal familiarity  with it quite   clear.[22]  They deny only that such experience, however vivid it might be, is  caused by (or embodied as) inner pictures. By contrast, in his Mental Images – A Defence, Hannay  (1971) vigorously championed the reality of inner pictures (see also  Hannay, 1973, and for a counterargument see Candlish, 1975). But,  despite the fact that he had no thought of reinstating imagery to its traditional importance in cognitive and semantic theory, Hannay  clearly saw himself (in 1971) as a lonely dissenter, a voice crying  in the wilderness against philosophy's virtually monolithic  iconophobic consensus. In the subsequent decades that consensus has  been fractured, but by no means shattered, by developments in  cognitive psychology and cognitive science (discussed below). In  particular, in the wake of Kosslyn's (1980, 1994) seminal work on the cognitive psychology of imagery, a growing number of philosophers are now ready to defend the reality of mental pictures, and show no sign  whatsoever of feeling embattled (e.g., von Eckardt, 1988, 1993; Tye,  1988, 1991; Mortensen, 1989; Brann, 1991; Cohen, 1996; Rollins,  2001). Many other philosophers, even if not entirely convinced about  pictures, now take a serious interest in the cognitive science of  imagery. Nonetheless, the post-Wittgensteinian consensus that imagery cannot  be as important as it once seemed to be, that it cannot be the ground of linguistic meaning or the prime vehicle of thought, remains  strong. Furthermore, Bennett & Hacker (2003) have recently made a powerful restatement of the Wittgensteinian case against mental  entities in general and mental pictures in particular. Despite all  that has happened in cognitive science, imagery has by no means  regained its former prominence in philosophy.