 Despite not containing that many major new ideas, Moore's ethical writings, and especially Principia Ethica, were extremely influential, both outside and within philosophy. Outside philosophy their main influence was through the literary and artistic figures in the Bloomsbury Group, such as Keynes, Lytton Strachey, and Leonard and Virginia Woolf, several of whom had come under Moore's influence while members with him of the Apostles society at Cambridge. They were most impressed by the last chapter of Principia Ethica, whose identification of aesthetic appreciation and personal love as the highest goods very much fit their predilections. Many of them — the gay men in particular — sexualized Moore's account of love, adding an erotic element not present in his formulations. And according to Keynes (though Leonard Woolf disagreed), they tended to ignore the impartial consequentialism within which Moore embedded those goods, and so concentrated on pursuing them just within their own lives rather than encouraging their wider spread in society. Characters representing Moorean ideas figure in some novels of E.M. Forster, another Cambridge Apostle. Also important for Principia Ethica's extra-philosophical appeal was its brash iconoclasm, its claiming, however inaccurately, to sweep away all past moral philosophy. This tone entirely fit its time, when the death of Victoria had led many in Britain to think a new, more progressive age was dawning. The book's influence within philosophy was even greater. On the normative side, views close to its ideal consequentialism remained prominent and even dominant until the 1930s, though it is hard to know how far this is attributable to Moore, since similar views had been widely accepted before him. In metaethics his non-naturalism likewise remained dominant for several decades, though here Moore played a larger role, especially for later generations, because of the vigor with which he presented the view. By talking explicitly of non-natural properties he at least seemed to give a more robust metaphysical side than predecessors such as Sidgwick had. And he defended the view more extensively, in particular by putting more weight on the open-question argument.  When Sidgwick noticed Bentham or Spencer equating goodness with a natural property such as pleasure, he thought it a minor slip that ought in charity to be ignored; Moore thought it a horrible error that vitiated the philosopher's entire system. By so emphasizing the two elements of non-naturalism — its realism and commitment to the autonomy of ethics — Moore helped initiate a sequence of developments in 20th-century metaethics. The first reaction to non-naturalism, other than simple acceptance, came from philosophers who accepted the autonomy of ethics but, often under the influence of logical positivism, rejected its moral realism, holding instead that there are no facts other than natural facts and no modes of knowing other than the empirical and the strictly logical. They therefore developed various versions of non-cognitivism, which hold that moral judgements are not true or false but express attitudes (emotivism) or issue something like imperatives (prescriptivism). These views allow for moral disagreement, since attitudes and imperatives can oppose each other. They also, their proponents claimed, give a better explanation of the open-question argument, since they find a distinctive emotive or action-guiding force in moral concepts and judgements that is not present in non-moral ones. Non-cognitivism can also explain why morality matters to us as it does. Non-naturalism implies that moral judgements concern a mysterious type of property, but why should facts about that property be important to us or influence our behavior? If such judgements express deep-seated attitudes, the question answers itself. A still later generation turned against non-cognitivism, in part for flouting the grammar of moral judgements and our natural response to them, both of which suggest realism, but also for a reason hostile to non-naturalism. When Moore and the other non-naturalists made substantive moral claims, they often said baldly that their judgements were self-evident, so anyone who denied them was morally blind. To the later generation this was unacceptably dogmatic, and the failing was even more plainly present in non-cognitivism, which pictured moral debate as a mere venting of emotions or issuing of commands. These philosophers therefore sought an account of ethics that would better allow for rational moral discussion. While many alternatives were canvassed, one that became prominent in the late 1950s was a neo-Aristotelian view according to which, if it is true that you ought, say, to relieve others' pain, this is because doing so will contribute to your own flourishing as a human being. Since such flourishing was to be understood in terms of humans' biological nature, this view at least implicitly challenged the autonomy of ethics grounded in the open-question argument, which itself met with criticism. Many of the view's partisans also rejected the calculating side of Moore's consequentialism, which identified right acts by adding up the goods and evils in their effects. Moral principles, they said, cannot be codified or theorized in this way. And even philosophers who did accept calculation tended to reject Moore's ideal consequentialist values as unacceptably extravagant; if right acts promoted goods, those had to be less contentious and more empirically measurable ones such as preference-satisfaction. By the 1960s, it seems fair to say, Moore's moral philosophy was not considered an especially live option. It was still important to read Principia Ethica, as having initiated the sequence of developments that led to the then-current views, but from the standpoint of most of those views Moore's approach to ethics was pretty fundamentally misguided. Fifty years later the situation is considerably more favorable to Moore. A growing body of philosophers now defend non-naturalist views in metaethics, some claiming to do so with less ontological extravagance than Moore but all embracing some account of moral truth that separates it sharply from scientific truth. In normative ethics, too, there is increasing sympathy for accounts of the good with an ideal or perfectionist content, and admiration for particular features of Moore's view, such as his valuing of personal love and his principle of organic unities. Even Moore's style of defending moral claims, which so outraged philosophers of the 1950s and 1960s, is in effect the standard style of contemporary normative theorizing, though it tends to take a more complex and circumspect form. Whereas Moore sometimes claimed that certain moral propositions are self-evident when considered on their own, philosophers today are more likely to give coherence arguments, appealing to intuitive judgements at different levels of generality and if possible on different topics, to arrive at an overall position with intuitive support at multiple points. But the basis of this more complex procedure, which Moore also sometimes used, is essentially the same appeal to intuitive moral judgement. And it is possible to see this approach as, not arrogant, but philosophically modest. Moore and his contemporaries from Sidgwick in the 1870s to Ross and others in the 1930s believed that if we ask, for example, why we should relieve others' pain, there is no answer: we simply should. The duty to promote others' good is an underivative one for which no deeper explanation can be given and which can only be recognized by intuition. In taking this stance they assumed that the more grandiose justifications sometimes offered by philosophers, such as the neo-Aristotelian argument that benefiting others is necessary for your own flourishing, or the Kantian argument that maxims contrary to it cannot be universalized, can never succeed. There is no moral philosopher's stone, or no way of escaping the need for direct moral judgement. Their moral methodology therefore reflected a modest belief about what philosophy can accomplish in normative ethics, as against the intuitive reflection that is also exercised, if less systematically, by non-philosophers. This philosophical modesty freed them to look more closely at the details of substantive moral views than philosophers seeking grand justifications tend to do, and to uncover more of their underlying structure, as in the principle of organic unities. In this respect contemporary ethics, which has spent several decades remaking many of their discoveries, is returning to their path. This is another way in which, however slowly, it is coming back to Moore.