 Non-cognitivist success in handling the embedding problem and related worries about reasoning would put non-cognitivists in a stronger argumentative position. But  some commentators have suggested that success at this endeavor might be a mixed blessing. Success may indicate not that non-cognitivism is the right account of moral judgments, but instead that the contrast with cognitivism is not stark enough to make out a real distinction. Perhaps the distinction between cognitivism and non-cognitivism collapses as non-cognitivist theories are modified to capture all of the phenomena that cognitivists challenge them to explain. While both its advocates and those who argued strenuously against it would likely find themselves somewhat disoriented if this were correct, it does seem that non-cognitivists would be most upset by this result. For their position was defined by denying key components of standard realist positions. If the cognitivist/non-cognitivist dichotomy does not hold up, it would seem to show either that the standard positions were not after all committed to those components, or that those commitments could not be avoided by plausible theories. Early versions of non-cognitivism did not seem subject to this sort of objection, precisely because they did not worry much about vindicating overall moral practice. Carnap (1937, 30–31) was happy to convict ordinary moral thinking of error. But as non-cognitivists have attempted to make sense of and explain most of the seemingly realist features of moral practice, it might seem hard to sustain the claim of a sharp contrast between factual language on the one hand and normative language on the other. Several challenges based on roughly this idea find a home in the recent literature. One way to push the point is to challenge the non-cognitivist to distinguish non-cognitivism from cognitivist relativism. A speaker relativist is in a particularly good position to highlight the suggestion that there is little difference between sophisticated non-cognitivism and cognitivism. Both speaker relativists and non-cognitivists can say that the appropriateness of a moral judgment depends on a speaker’s attitudes. If the non-cognitivist suggests that moral judgments predicate properties in a secondary way (perhaps to handle embedding), the cognitivist relativist can agree. And the theories can agree that the property predicated is determined as a function of the speaker’s moral attitudes. Thus it becomes increasingly difficult to say precisely what the difference between the views is (Dreier 1999). Another line of argument with a similar upshot proceeds from minimalism of the sort we have already canvassed. Deflationism about truth or truth-aptness can be used to argue that there is no room for non-cognitivism of the sort that succeeds in vindicating much of moral practice. If there is no more robust understanding of truth conditions than can be secured by minimalism about truth conditions, it will be difficult for the quasi-realist non-cognitivist to make the distinctive negative semantic claim – that moral judgements are never true and not the kind of thing that can be true or false. Simple moral sentences may be truth apt if all there is to having truth conditions is to meet minimal requirements of having a meaningful use, being in the right mood, and combining grammatically with other sentences to yield more complex embeddings.  Furthermore, if the minimalist strategy extends to beliefs, so that all there is to being a belief is to be a state of mind expressible by such minimally truth–apt sentences, moral judgements will be beliefs. The quasi-realist program to vindicate as much of ordinary moral practice might thus endanger non-cognitivism when carried to this extreme. Success would leave us with no way to distinguish plausible non-cognitivism from cognitivism. More concretely, some semantic theorists have proposed that all that is needed to have minimal truth conditions is for a set of judgments to satisfy two constraints: (1) Sentences composed of the relevant expressions must exhibit the syntactic surface features of paradigmatic truth-apt sentences such as those used to express ordinary assertions, and they must embed grammatically in more complex sentences such as conditionals, propositional attitude ascriptions, and so on. (2) Use of these expressions must exhibit a certain amount of discipline so that there are clearly appropriate and inappropriate conditions for using them in sentences of the form noted in the first condition (Boghossian 1990, Wright 1993; Divers and Miller 1994). Normative discourse seems to meet both of these constraints relatively straightforwardly, and this may mean that moral sentences are truth-apt and that some of them are true (Divers and Miller 1994). Early critics of the collapse argument resisted on the basis of an alleged constitutive connection between truth-aptness and genuinely cognitive states. Such theorists regard it as a platitude about indicative sentences that they are conventionally apt for making assertions and that assertions express beliefs. If belief-expression is one of the criteria for truth-aptness, non-cognitivists will be in a position to use psychological non-cognitivism as a reason to deny that moral judgments are genuinely representational even when they meet minimalist requirements (Jackson, Oppy, Smith 1994). So-called minimal truth conditions can remain part of the quasi-realist program so long as this is compatible with denying that moral judgements express beliefs. Partly in  response to this move, minimalist defenders of the collapse argument have responded by moving to the notion of minimal belief.  They can say that a state of mind is a belief and hence cognitive if and only if it is one expressed by a sentence with truth conditions.  Since minimalism secures minimal truth conditions, indicative moral sentences have truth conditions and the states they express are beliefs. If the argument works, quasi-realist non-cognitivism would undermine its own right to employ both of the negative constitutive claims distinctive of non-cognitivism. Minimalist non-cognitivists have regrouped in various ways.  One way is to resist the extension of the minimalist strategy to belief (Sinclair 2007). Another is to distinguish minimal and robust notions of belief and representation. Minimal beliefs would need only to be states of mind expressed in assertions by indicative sentences, while robust beliefs would meet some stronger requirement of representationality (Blackburn 2006).  Non-cognitivism would then be committed to the view that moral judgements did not express robust belief (Sinclair 2006; McDonald 2012). The hope would be to contrast the entire minimalist package with robust truth, robust truth-conditionality, and robust belief. Such quasi-realist minimalists would be trying to find truth conditions which are (1) sufficient to make sense of using sentences having such truth-conditions in all of the ways that we use paradigmatically truth-apt sentences, and (2) which still fall short of robust representational truth conditions. One might be a bit worried about the dialectic.  If there are minimal and non-minimal readings of all the distinctive claims that can be used to distinguish cognitivism from non-cognitivism, we may lose are grip on the distinction between the positions (Dreier, 2004b). It is in any case controversial whether the minimalist proposal is viable, either for truth conditionality or for belief, let alone for further extensions beyond these (Dreier 2006; Dunaway 2010). One final sort of worry about the distinctiveness of non-cognitivism is worthy of mention. This worry is that if too many domains of discourse are such that they require non-cognitive analysis, the contrast between cognitive and non-cognitive domains on which the view depends will be hard to sustain. Blackburn, for example, suggests quasi-realist approaches not just to moral discourse, but also to modality, causation and probability. One may wonder what he means to deny about these domains that is not also applicable to the rest of our seemingly contentful judgments (Rosen 1998).  This kind of collapse is in danger of assimilating the putatively cognitive and the putatively non-cognitive from the other  direction – by making the former look more like the latter, rather than the other way around as with the worries about minimalism. Even Blackburn himself on occasion expresses worries about this problem (Blackburn 1993, 34), but more commonly he and other non-cognitivists resist the worry by pointing to other domains of discourse which are not amenable to non-cognitivist analysis. A short discussion of a still different collapse argument employed against noncognitivism by Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit, one which has generated quite a bit of literature, can be found in the following supplementary document. Supplement on  Assertion Conditions and Truth-Conditionality