 The celebrated ‘protocol sentence controversy’ in the Vienna Circle was initiated by Carnap’s syntactic analysis of observation sentences, or ‘protocols’ (Carnap 1932a). The salient feature of Carnap’s analysis was its ‘syntacticism’, the idea that meaning is wholly a function of the serial arrangements of symbols. Naturally, syntacticism precludes any effort to explain protocols by their relation to ‘experiences’, ‘sensory impressions’, or ‘observations’. Otto Neurath criticisized Carnap’s analysis, arguing that protocols should be understood physicalistically, as sentences of the physical language, and their origins and grounds are to be explicated naturalistically, by means of behaviorist psychology (Uebel 2007, Ch. 8). But Schlick recoiled at the very idea that the relation between observation sentences and what they describe should be explicated by any means other than philosophical analysis. So, in his classic 1934 essay, “On the Foundations of Knowledge,” he introduced so-called ‘affirmations’ (Konstatierungen) in the effort to explicate the relation between physicalistic protocols and the experiences on which they are grounded (Schlick 1979b, 370–387). Otto Neurath responded, in his 1934 essay “Radical Physicalism and the ‘Real World’”, condemning Schlick’s view as just so much metaphysics, while Carnap regarded affirmations as protocols of a phenomenal language, along the lines of one of the alternatives he had outlined in his 1932 paper, “On Protocol Sentences” (Neurath 1983, 66; Carnap 1932b, 458–463). Still, Carnap objected that, unless Schlick could explain how affirmations might be translated into sentences of the physical language, then affirmations violated the thesis of physicalism. Schlick responded that affirmations, like “Here now white”, were the responses of investigators when asked about their personal experiences in experimental situations. Thus construed, the demonstrative character of affirmations ensures their incorrigibility (Schlick 2009, 661–674). Although their demonstrative character prevents them from being regarded as proper physicalistic sentences, they are obviously translatable into statements of the physical language. But then, even though they lose their distinctive epistemic character, for they are no longer incorrigible or indubitable, they still convey epistemic warrant to their physicalistic translations. To Carnap, the deeper problem was that, by the lights of his 1934 work on The Logical Syntax of Language, affirmations are not well-formed expressions at all. Earlier, in his (1932a) contribution to the protocol sentence controversy, Carnap’s treatment of observation was based on the Thesis of Metalogic, the idea that all philosophical contentions (which are not nonsense) are metalinguistic claims about linguistic expressions and their logical (particularly syntactical) properties (Carnap 1932a, 435n). The function of the Metalogic Thesis was to isolate pseudo-theses or statements which seem to concern substantive matters but are really concerned with logical or linguistic matters. Of course, these pseudo-theses became known as ‘pseudo-object sentences’ and their analysis became a centerpiece of Carnap’s Logical Syntax-era philosophy (Carnap 1937, Sec. 74). And the Metalogic Thesis, together with the Principle of Tolerance (which asserts that the choice of any specific language is a conventional decision), formed the principal theses of Carnap’s philosophy of logic in the Thirties (Carnap 1937, 51–2). Otto Neurath, who endorsed the Metalogic Thesis and the Tolerance Principle, drew the obvious conclusion that Schlick’s defense of the correspondence conception of truth, explicated by his analysis of affirmations, committed him to the recognition of “the one, true reality” and “the real world” (Neurath 1983, pp. 106–8; Uebel 2007, Sec. 8.2). In short, Schlick’s foundations were spelled out in nothing more than philosophical pseudo-statements. What Neurath and (presumably) Carnap both missed was that Schlick’s thinking about meaning and linguistic significance had come a long way since his 1926 essay on “Experience, Cognition, and Metaphysics”, in which he tried to link Wittgenstein’s remarks about internal relations in the Tractatus with his own doctrine of implicit definition (Wittgenstein 1921, 4.122, 4.125, 4.1251, 5.232). There the goal was to apply both these ideas to the distinction between intuitions and concepts. The result was something of a disaster. For it implied what Schlick called “The Incommunicability of Contents”, the idea that any effort to communicate non-formal contents, like the greenness of the color green or the distinctive smell of wood smoke, must forever remain ineffable (Oberdan 1996, Sec. 2). But it was not long before Schlick’s efforts to explain linguistic meaning and scientific knowledge in terms of their ‘form’ and ‘content’ were abandoned and by the 1934–1935 academic year, he was developing what might well be called ‘a semantic conception’, spelled out in terms of grammars and the rules which constitute them, and presenting his new vision of language in his lectures on “Logik und Erkenntnistheorie” (Schlick 1934–5).