 Why do moderate internalists believe that, despite the success of arguments that ordinary content is often or always broad, we nevertheless need a notion of narrow content? There are four main kinds of arguments they have found persuasive. One influential argument for narrow content (Fodor 1987; a recent  defense of this kind of argument, with repies to criticisms, is  Gaukroger, forthcoming) appeals to considerations involving causal explanation. We might outline the argument like this. A first premise is that mental states causally explain behavior by virtue of the content they have. Although this has been denied by some, it certainly seems to be a central part of commonsense psychology. Our behavior seems to be a causal consequence of our beliefs and desires; moreover, the content of those beliefs and desires seems to be centrally involved in the causation of behavior. We behave the way we do because of what we want and what we believe, and this seems to be just another way of saying that we behave as we do because of the contents of our beliefs and desires. A second premise is that the causal powers of an entity, its capacity to produce effects, must be intrinsic features of the entity. Thus twins, who share all their intrinsic properties, must share their causal powers. This premise seems plausible for at least two reasons. First, causation is local. It seems that features of the environment can affect an individual's actions only by way of effects on the individual's intrinsic properties. Second, causal powers should be evaluated across contexts. If an astronaut on the Moon can easily lift a one-hundred-kilogram weight and I, on Earth, cannot, this does not mean that the astronaut is stronger; the crucial issue is whether the astronaut can lift more than I can in the same environments. This appears to show that my Twin Earth counterpart and I have the same causal powers even though I can obtain water by turning on the faucet and he cannot, since our parallel actions will achieve parallel results provided that our environments are the same. A third and final premise is that broad content does not characterize intrinsic features, at least not essentially; thus twins need not share broad contents. According to the first premise, mental states must have a kind of content that causally explains behavior. Taken together, the second and third premises show that broad content cannot fulfill this role. The conclusion of the argument, then, is that mental states must have narrow contents, contents that are shared between twins. Externalists have attacked this argument at its second premise, the premise that causal powers must be intrinsic properties. Against the argument that causal powers must be intrinsic because causation is local, Burge (1986, 1989) has argued that local causation is entirely compatible with broad individuation. Against the argument that the cross-context test for sameness of causal powers shows that they are intrinsic, Burge (1989) suggests that causal powers are typically identified relative to a normal environment; thus, for example, it would be reasonable to distinguish between a heart and a similar organ whose function is to pump waste even if one of these organs could be successfully surgically replaced by the other. Burge (1986) also argues that actual psychological theories, such as Marr's theory of vision, do not satisfy internalist constraints. (For criticisms of Burge's interpretation of Marr, see Segal 1989 and Egan 1991. Burge 2010 is a book-length defense of the claim that perceptual psychology is anti-individualistic.) In a later essay (Fodor 1991), Fodor defends a weaker and more complicated version of the second premise. He suggests that there are some extrinsic properties, such as being a planet, that affect causal powers, and others, like being part of a universe in which a certain coin toss comes out heads, that are irrelevant to causal powers. He then offers a criterion for distinguishing between causally relevant extrinsic properties and causally irrelevant extrinsic properties: roughly, an extrinsic property is causally irrelevant to outcomes that it is logically connected to. He then argues that broad content does not satisfy the criterion for being a causally relevant extrinsic property. (It should be noted that in still more recent work (Fodor 1994), Fodor has abandoned the idea that narrow content is important for psychology.) A somewhat different motivation for narrow content (Loar 1988) appeals to the idea that we have introspective access to the contents of our own thoughts. In particular, it seems that we should be able to determine introspectively whether two of our thoughts have the same content or not. But the kind of difference in content that distinguishes Oscar's thoughts from Twin Oscar's thoughts seems to be the sort of difference that they could not in principle be introspectively aware of. From the inside, so to speak, there is no way for Oscar and Twin Oscar to tell whether they are thinking XYZ-thoughts or H2O-thoughts. (Recall that they are unaware of what the microstructure of the substance they call “water” is, although they assume that it has one.) The difference in broad content between the beliefs of Oscar and Twin Oscar seems to be a difference to which they themselves have no access. It is difficult to formulate this point precisely, however. For instance, Oscar can think that water is wet and then think the meta-level thought, “that thought I just had was about water!”, referring thereby to H2O and thus expressing the very aspect of his original thought which distinguishes his content from Twin Oscar's. Since neither Oscar nor Twin Oscar has thoughts about the substance his twin has thoughts about, it is not clear what it means to say that they cannot introspectively distinguish between these different thoughts. One way to try to clarify and reinforce the argument is to consider the phenomenon of “slow switching” (introduced in Burge 1988, and used by Boghossian 1989 to pose difficulties for self-knowledge). Suppose Oscar moves to Twin Earth. Initially his water-thoughts will continue to be about water, but it seems that gradually, the longer he interacts with XYZ and the longer he is out of touch with H2O, his thoughts will come to be about XYZ rather than H2O. If this is correct, then his ‘water’-thoughts will have come over time to have a different broad content than they previously had. However, this change in content will be completely invisible to Oscar himself. From his own subjective point of view, his thoughts appear to have exactly the same content as before. If there is a kind of mental content to which we have introspective access, and if introspective access must include the ability to recognize when contents are the same or different, then the sort of content to which we have introspective access cannot be broad content. This suggests that we need a concept of narrow content to capture the kind of content that we are immediately aware of. Burge's response to this sort of argument is to accept that we have introspective knowledge of the contents of our own thoughts, but deny that this entails that we can tell introspectively whether two contents are the same or different (Burge 1988). In response, some suggest that knowing that my thought is about water requires ruling out relevant alternative possibilities, and that in slow switching cases the possibility that my thought is instead about XYZ is in fact a relevant alternative that we cannot rule out. (For further dialectical twists and turns, see Ludlow and Martin 1998, and Nuccetelli 2003.) A related issue is that describing a subject's beliefs in terms of broad content can make them appear irrational even though they are not: when beliefs are described in terms of broad content, they can be inconsistent with one another even though the inconsistency is in principle not discoverable by the subject. A famous example is due to Saul Kripke (1979). In Kripke's example, Pierre, a Frenchman, grows up with a belief he expresses by saying “Londres est jolie.” This belief has the (broad) content that London is pretty. Later he moves to England, where he learns English by immersion rather than by translation. He comes to have a second belief, which he expresses in English by saying “London is not pretty.” This belief has the broad content that London is not pretty. Pierre never realizes that the city he thinks of as Londres and the city he thinks of as London are in fact the same city. His two beliefs directly contradict one another, and yet he is not guilty of any sort of failure of rationality; it is impossible for him to ascertain that the two beliefs are contradictory. Kripke himself does not offer a solution to his puzzle and does not discuss narrow content. But a natural response to the example is to suppose that, while the belief Pierre accepts and the one he rejects have the same broad content, they have different narrow contents. If so, then the sort of content most relevant to determining whether someone's beliefs and inferences are rational is not broad content but narrow content. One response to this sort of argument is offered by Stalnaker (1990) in a critique of Loar (1988). Stalnaker agrees that examples like that of Pierre require us to distinguish between the world as it is according to Pierre, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the propositions ordinarily expressed by the sentences we use to describe those beliefs, e.g. the proposition that London is pretty. However, in his view it does not follow that an accurate description of the world according to Pierre must be narrow: “I don't think the belief states themselves — the ways the world is according to the thinker — are any less causally and socially infected than the language in which beliefs are ascribed” (p. 203). Jackson (2003) responds to Stalnaker's reasons for skepticism about narrow content. A recent argument for the existence of narrow content is an argument from phenomenal intentionality (Loar 2003; Horgan and Tienson 2002; Horgan, Tienson and Graham 2004; Kriegel 2013). To understand this argument, we first need to understand what its proponents mean by “phenomenal intentionality.” Philosophers of mind have traditionally drawn a sharp distinction between two sorts of properties of mental states, phenomenal properties and intentional properties. Phenomenal properties have to do with the felt character of conscious experience, with “what it's like,” in Thomas Nagel's famous phrase (Nagel 1974). Intentional properties have to do with the representational character of mental states, i.e. with their content. One view of the relation between phenomenal and intentional properties, called “separatism” by Horgan and Tienson (2002), is that they are independent of one another: any given phenomenal character could be accompanied by any intentional properties (or none), and vice versa. According to Lycan (2008 §9), this view was “the standard attitude among philosophers of mind between the 1950s and the 1980s.” On another view of the relation between the intentional and the phenomenal, known as representationalism, the phenomenal character of experience is completely determined by its intentional nature. The key thesis of phenomenal intentionality is that, while representationalism is correct that there is an intimate connection between phenomenology and intentionality, the determination runs in the opposite direction: there is a kind of intentional content, phenomenal intentionality, which is entirely constitutively determined by the phenomenal character of a mental state. This thesis is one premise of the argument from phenomenal intentionality to narrow content. The other premise is that the phenomenal character of experience is itself narrow. Putting the two premises together, we get the following argument for the existence of narrow content: “(1) There is pervasive intentional content that constitutively depends on phenomenology alone. (2) Phenomenology constitutively depends only on narrow factors. So, (3) There is pervasive intentional content that constitutively depends only on narrow factors” (Horgan and Tienson 2002, p. 527; cf. Horgan, Tienson and Graham 2004, p. 300). Both premises of this argument are controversial. The second premise, that phenomenology is narrow, is rejected by phenomenal externalists (Lycan 2008, §14), while the controversial character of the first premise, that there is intentional content that is entirely determined by phenomenology, can be seen in the fact that its proponents have advanced it as a departure from orthodoxy. Defenders of phenomenal intentionality have supported both premises by appeal to brain-in-vat scenarios. Suppose that alien beings synthesize a structure identical to your own brain, and connect it to a computer-controlled apparatus that provides inputs to this brain-like object which maintain its similarity to your brain over a substantial period of time. (See Horgan, Tienson and Graham 2004 for further details. This fairly elaborate brain-in-vat scenario avoids some of Burge's objections (Burge 2003, pp. 443–445) to Loar's less-fully-described version (Loar 2003).) Defenders of phenomenal intentionality find it intuitively plausible that by virtue of its physical similarity with your brain, the brain-like object will also share your phenomenology, supporting the narrowness of phenomenology; and that the brain-like object will, by virtue of sharing your phenomenology, also share many of the contents of your mental states, supporting the existence of phenomenally-determined intentionality. (For these two uses of the brain-in-vat scenario, see Horgan, Tienson and Graham 2004, p. 302. For additional arguments for the existence of phenomenal intentionality, see Kriegel 2013, §2.1. Criticisms of phenomenal intentionality may be found in Bailey and Richards 2014 and Werner 2015.) The most immediately plausible purported example of phenomenal intentionality is the content of perceptual experience. If perceptual experience is a genuine example of phenomenally determined intentionality, but also the only example, then the argument from phenomenal intentionality would show the existence of narrow contents of perceptual states, but would be silent on whether other mental states such as beliefs and desires have narrow contents. However, some defenders of phenomenal intentionality (e.g. Horgan, Tienson and Graham 2004 and several of the contributors to Bayne and Montague 2011)  would go further, arguing that there are distinctive phenomenologies of agency and of propositional attitudes including beliefs and desires; that the phenomenal properties of these mental states also constitutively determine intentional properties; and moreover that all intentionality either is identical with, or is derived from, phenomenal intentionality. If these bolder theses are correct, then the argument from phenomenal intentionality would give reason to think that all of the propositional attitudes have narrow contents, and that their wide contents, if any, are derived from these narrow contents.