 The case for neutral monism is best made by enumerating its virtues. We have already Russell’s reasons for valuing ontological parsimony (see section   4.3.1  above). Neutral monism has this theoretical virtue to a high degree. The “immense simplification” (Russell 1959: 252) it affords was what most attracted him to this view. The spirit of Mach’s neutral monism is similarly antimetaphysical: nothing is important except what can be observed or is a datum for us, and everything hypothetical, metaphysical and superfluous, is to be eliminated. (Mach 1886: 27–28) First on the list of “metaphysical entities” (Mach 1905: 13) that have to go are “the ‘unfathomable’ thing and the equally ‘unexplorable’ ego” (Mach 1905: 8). And James concurs: “Consciousness as it is ordinarily understood does not exist, any more than does Matter” (James 1905: 63). Mach, James, and Russell agree that neutral monism solves the mind-body problem. Russell’s account of experience (of perceptual consciousness) may serve as an illustration of the point. Russell frequently emphasized the miracle or mystery involved in traditional accounts of perception (1927b: 147, 154; 1927a: 275, 400). At the end of a purely physical chain of causes there mysteriously arises something of a completely different nature: an experience (a sensation of red, say). This is the hard problem of consciousness. The neutral monist solves this problem by maintaining that “we cannot say that ‘matter is the cause of our sensations” (1927b: 290). Mach agrees: “Bodies do not produce sensations” (Mach 1886: 29). To suggest otherwise is to rely on “the monstrous idea of employing atoms to explain psychical processes” (Mach 1886: 311). Matter/bodies are, after all, nothing but collections of neutral entities, i.e., of Russellian events or Machian elements. So mind-body causation reduces to causal relations among events or elements. And, for all we know, the event/element causing a sensation may be quite similar to the sensation it causes. This closes the apparent chasm between the “material process” and the ensuing experience, and the mystery of perception vanishes. The Analysis of Matter (Russell 1927a) is widely regarded as the most important text of the neutral monist literature. Chapter one of this book, entitled “The Nature of the Problem”, states it as follows: the world of physics is, prima facie, so different from the world of perception that it is difficult to see how the one can afford evidence for the other; moreover, physics and physiology themselves seem to give grounds for supposing that perception cannot give very accurate information as to the external world, and thus weaken the props upon which they are built…We must therefore find an interpretation of physics which gives a due place to perceptions; if not, we have no right to appeal to the empirical evidence. (Russell 1927a: 6–7; see also Russell 1948: Part III, Ch. IV) The previous remarks addressed to the mind-body problem in general, and to the problem of perceptual experience in particular, contain the core of the solution Russell proposes. By “bridging the gulf between physics (as commonly interpreted) and perception” (Russell 1927a: 7), neutral monism promises to solve this problem—a problem that Russell took to be difficult and largely unnoticed (see Russell 1948: 175–176). Mach and James understand neutral monism as an especially radical form of achieving perceptual contact with the world. It might be understood as a limiting case of naïve realism—a case in which the relation between the subject and its perceptual object becomes the identity relation. In perception “subject and object merge” (James 1905: 57). A single reality—a red patch, say, when we see a tomato—is a constituent of two groups of neutral entities: the group that is the perceiver, and the group that is the tomato. The mind and its object become one. In James’s words: A given undivided portion of experience, taken in one context of associates, play[s] the part of the knower, or a state of mind, or “consciousness”; while in a different context the same undivided bit of experience plays the part of a thing known, of an objective “content”. In a word, in one group it figures as a thought, in another group as a thing. (James 1904b: 9–10) Some have seen this epistemic achievement as the most important reward of neutral monism. But Russell dissented. There are well known problems surrounding accounts of perception that conceive it as a form of direct contact with the world. Among them are the problems arising from the fact that an object can present different and incompatible appearances to different observers. Some neutral monists concluded that “nature is a seething chaos of contradiction” (Holt 1914: 276). But Russell chose to abandon the view that in perception “subject and object merge”. Instead he locates the red patch you see when looking at a tomato in your brain, and distinguishes it from the tomato (from the group of events that constitute the tomato). That is why he can assert that he “know[s] about what is happening in the brain exactly what naïve realism thinks it knows about what is happening in the outside world” (Russell 1927b: 138). This solves the problem of different and incompatible appearances: compatibility is restored by moving the conflicting features away from the single physical object and into the brains of the different percipients. But in making this move Russell abandons the naïve realism of Mach and James and puts a version of representative realism in its place. Thereby the problem of our knowledge of the external world is reintroduced in full  force.[12] Mach operates on the assumption that all sciences form a whole (see Mach 1886: 30). The great virtue of neutral monism is that it affords a unified perspective from which scientific inquiry can be undertaken: what I aimed at was merely to attain a safe and clear philosophical standpoint, whence practicable paths, shrouded in no metaphysical clouds, might be seen leading not only into the field of physics but also into that of psycho-physiology. (Mach 1886: 47) The idea of neutral monism as a bridge between different sciences is also present in Russell. He presents neutral monism as an attempt to harmonize two different tendencies, one in psychology, the other in physics…[viz.]…the materialistic tendency of psychology and the anti-materialistic tendency of physics. (Russell 1921: 5–6) According to Jerry Fodor, “the form of a philosophical theory, often enough, is: Let’s try looking over here” (Fodor 1981: 31). The current revival of interest in neutral monism is, perhaps, best seen as part of the general movement to explore all possible options in the metaphysics of consciousness—a movement that is driven by the sense that the traditional positions face insurmountable obstacles. David Chalmers’s paper “Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism” (Chalmers 2015) provides an illuminating account of the dialectic that drives some contemporary philosophers to explore the little known neutral monistic territory.