 Traditional neutral monism has been characterized as a form of reductionism or constructionism. The reductionist version of neutral monism takes mental and physical phenomena to be identical with groups of neutral entities. Russell’s constructionist version of the doctrine contents itself with the claim that there are logical constructions of neutral entities that play the roles of physical and mental entities; whether there also are mental and physical entities, as originally conceived, is a question that the constructionist does not address. Neutral monism differs from other versions of reductionism/constructionism by insisting on the neutrality of the basis. And its reductive/constructionist spirit sets it apart from the certain versions of nonreductive theories (about the mental) with which it is occasionally confused or identified. Panpsychism, phenomenalism, emergentism, and the dual aspect theory (sometimes understood as property dualism) are the leading candidates. And recently a number of philosophers have argued that neutral monism—in its traditional form as well as in its new Russellian monist form—is best interpreted as a nonstandard version of physicalism. Panpsychism holds that every basic entity—usually understood as a physical entity—is also a mind. The physical nature (if present) and the mental nature of the basic entities are fundamental, i.e., irreducible (to each other or to anything else). On the face of it, panpsychism and neutral monism are strikingly different. Neutral monism reduces mental and physical phenomena, panpsychism does not; neutral monism holds that basic reality is neutral, panpsychism does not. And neutral monism is compatible with the view that most physical objects, and all their parts, are absolutely nonmental, whereas panpsychism is not. This is how things look on the Neither View of neutrality. On the Both View of neutrality, things are less clear. The most natural reading of the Both View will, however, not yield panpsychism—the view that every basic physical entity has a mind—but a dual aspect view—a view according to which every basic entity has a physical and and a mental aspect or side. This raises further questions about how to distinguish panpsychist and dual aspect theories—questions that are too specialized to be pursued here. While the definition of neutral monism may distinguish it clearly from panpsychism, consideration of the extant versions of neutral monism has tended to suggest a different picture. The allegedly neutral basic entities of traditional neutral monism strike many as manifestly mental (see section  7.2  above). This is not the place to assess the accuracy of this impression. But there can be little doubt that it is the source of the wide-spread suspicion that neutral monism is best understood as a version of panpsychism or of phenomenalism. Phenomenalism has been defended as a doctrine about language, about facts, and about things. Taken in this last sense, it attempts to “reduce material objects to sensa, that is, to explain them as consisting solely of sensa or as being primarily groups or patterns of them” (Hirst 2006: 271). We might substitute the terms “sense-data”, “sensations”, “percepts”, “experiences”, etc. for Hirst’s term “sensa”. The worry is always the same: the basic entities of neutral monism are not neutral but mental. Hence neutral monism is a form of purely mentalistic metaphysics. It is true that traditional neutral monism is stated in terms of sensations (Mach), pure experience (James), and sensations and percepts (Russell). But, as used by the neutral monists, these terms are supposedly purged of their usual mental dimension. In the neutral monist framework, the predicates “mental” and “physical” apply solely to groups of neutral entities. To call a particular element—a sensation, a percept, a bit of pure experience—mental or physical is to speak elliptically: it is to say that this neutral entity is a constituent of a group of elements that, taken as a whole, is mental or physical. Moreover, neutral monism is not limited to those entities that are sensations and perceptions—this is particularly clear in the case of Mach and Russell. The existence of vast majority of neutral entities is inferred from the minute set of elements that are sensations and perceptions. These inferred elements are outside of all minds (see especially section  4.3.3  above). These are the strong anti-phenomenalist claims that neutral monism makes. How successfully the various neutral monists defend these claims is, of course, a difficult further question. As in the case of the panpsychism suspicion, the source of the worry that neutral monism may collapse into phenomenalism is grounded, not in the definition of neutral monism, but in the actual versions of neutral monism that have been put forth. The worry is that the allegedly neutral entities are really mental, thereby turning neutral monism into phenomenalism. The theory of dual or double aspects is usually traced back to Spinoza (1677). The fundamental idea uniting the family of views that are gathered together under this label is that there is an underlying reality that we can grasp as mental or as physical, depending on the point of view from which we apprehend it. The mental and the physical are aspects of this underlying reality which, in itself, is neither mental nor physical. Each one of us can know their own brain under both of these aspects—via introspection and (scientific) observation. But the claim of the theory is quite general: everything there is is to be understood as consisting of an underlying reality that has these two aspects. Neutral monism and the dual-aspect theory share a central claim: there is an underlying reality that is neither mental nor physical. But that is where the agreement stops. Neutral monism has no room for the central feature of the dual-aspect theory: the mental and physical aspects, or sides, or properties that characterize the underlying entities of dual-aspect theory. The neutral monist accepts the mental/physical distinction. But it resides at the level or groups of neutral entities. Grouped one way, the neutral entities that constitute your brain are thoughts and feelings; grouped another way, they are atoms and neurons and lobes. Whether a given group of interrelated neutral entities counts as mental or physical depends on the functional role this group occupies (see section  3).  On this picture, the mentality and physicality are features of complex structures of neutral entities. But the entities themselves are free of mental or physical aspects/sides/properties. Therein consists their neutrality. But if neutrality is understood according to the Both View, the case for identifying neutral monism with the dual-aspect theory is strengthened. Much will turn on how the details of the Both View are articulated. It must not, for example, be understood as proposing the identification of mental and physical properties. For the dual-aspect theory insists that the two aspects are fundamental and irreducible to each other. Another question concerns the relationship of the aspects and properties. If aspects are understood as properties, dual-aspect theory may simply collapse into property dualism (see, e.g., Van Gulick 2014). Dual-aspect theorists have pushed back by insisting that aspects are not properties (see Skrbina 2014: 228–29). But this may, in turn, block the project of reconciling the dual-aspect theory with neutral monism. For the neutrality, on the Both as well as on the Neither View, is understood in terms of mental and physical properties. There is a lively debate concerning the relationship between neutral monism and dual-aspect theory (see, e.g., Velmans 2008; Skrbina 2014; see also section  5.4).  The decision about these two types of theory—whether they are incompatible rivals, whether they are distinct but compatible, or whether they are identical—is still out. The basic idea of emergence has to do with the fact that complex systems may display interesting novel properties—properties not possessed by their parts. This idea has been regimented in various ways. Following Chalmers, we can distinguish between weak and strong emergence. Weakly emergent phenomena are merely unexpected, given our knowledge of the domain from which they arise. Strongly emergent phenomena are not just unexpected; they cannot (not even in principle) be deduced from the domain from which they arise (see Chalmers 2006: 244). Weak emergence will, no doubt, be a wide-spread phenomenon in the neutral monist world. It poses no problem. But neutral monism, understood as a form of reductionism/constructionism appears to rule out strong emergence. Phenomena that cannot be deduced from the domain from which they arise cannot be reduced to it or constructed from it. The existence of strongly emergent features would therefore falsify the neutral monist thesis that everything is reducible to/constructible from the underlying neutral level of the neutral monist ontology. The contrary view is defended by Landini, who argues that (strong) emergence plays a crucial role in Russell’s neutral monism. If the fundamental transient physical particulars (or events) have no phenomenal characters (or qualia), such qualities must be understood as strongly emergent features within the framework of Russell’s neutral monism. Qualia never occur in transient particulars. In Russell’s view, qualia emerge from the series of brain states…colors, pitches, smells, tastes and textures are emergent properties of series of brain states…. (Landini 2011: 302–305) But Russell’s remarks about emergence (Russell 1927b: 293–96) allow different reading. When called upon to present examples of events, Russell gives the following list: seeing a flash of lightning…hearing a tyre burst, or smelling a rotten egg, or feeling the coldness of a frog…particular colors and sounds and so on are events. (Russell 1927b: 287–88) All of these events are percepts—the only kinds of events we can know without inference. And, pace Landini, all of these events do have qualitative characters. When Russell speaks of emergence, he has in mind the relationship between the abstract mathematical properties of events and their intrinsic qualitative characters. And he maintains that latter are emergent with respect to the former because there is no inferential path leading from the abstract mathematical features of an event to its intrinsic qualitative features. What this means is that if one were to carry out the neutral monist program by focusing exclusively on the abstract mathematical characteristics of events, then the existence qualitative characters of certain events would constitute a (strongly) emergent fact. For such abstract and mathematical considerations cannot conceivably…prove that there are visual events, or auditory events, or events of any of the kind that we know by perception. (Russell 1927b: 295) But this is not how the neutral monist (who follows Russell’s lead) starts out. Our percepts are our initial data, and they are qualitative through and through. The existence of quality is not something that we have to deduce from other known facts. On the contrary, it is the initial datum. Such other events as we may believe in, whose intrinsic qualities we do not know, are all inferred from this bedrock of qualitatively loaded percepts. It is therefore a mistake to try to explain the existence of qualitative characteristics (or qualia) as emerging from complex brain states. These characteristics are there, in the form of our percepts, at the very foundation of Russell’s neutral monism. In the past neutral monism has often been interpreted as a form of mentalism. A number of contemporary philosophers argue that it is best understood as a form of physicalism. Daniel Stoljar (2001), Derk Pereboom (2011, 2015), and Barbara Montero (2015) have interpreted Russellian monism (see section  5.5)  as a form of physicalism. They argue that the categorical properties that ground the dispositional properties that feature in physical theory are themselves physical properties, albeit physical properties of a different kind. Once the realm of the physical is thus expanded, the attempt to classify the categorical bases of the dispositional properties of physics as neutral properties appears misguided. The proposal to construe the categorical bases as neutral results from an unduly narrow conception of the physical. The recent literature also contains a number of attempts to interpret traditional neutral monism as a form of physicalism. Banks (see section  5.2)  presents his neutral monism (realistic empiricism) as a direct descendant of traditional neutral monism (Banks 2014, viii). But he also holds that his neutral monism is “a kind of physicalism” (Banks 2014: 7, 142). Like Russell, he embraces an ontology of events. And he takes himself to follow Russell in construing these events as manifestations of underlying powers or energies—such as electromagnetism, gravitation, and nuclear forces (Banks 149), as well as neural energies (Banks 2014: 142). These considerations lead him to the following observation about the nature of Russell’s (and his own) event particulars: Russellian neutral event particulars are so physicalistic in nature that there does not seem to be any reason to assume that these natural qualities in physics have anything at all in common with our sensations, which are qualities of a very different order. A typical event particular in Russell’s universe would be something perhaps like the emission of a quantum of radiation from an atom, having little or nothing to do with events in the human nervous system at a very different scale of complexity and size. (Banks 2014: 156) There is much more to Banks’s complex view. But this suffices to convey something of the physicalistic flavor of his interpretation of traditional neutral monism. After a careful survey of the development of Russell’s neutral monism, Donovan Wishon concludes that Russell’s final version of neutral monism (developed in the 1940s and after) “is very plausibly interpreted as a version of ‘Russellian Physicalism’” (Wishon 2015: 92). Among other things, he draws our attention to Russell’s own claim that “I find myself in ontology increasingly materialistic” (Russell 1946: 700). And he points out that Russell argues that all events, including all our mental events, are subject to the laws of physics. Hence “mental events will turn out to be a subclass of the physical events that make up reality” (Wishon 2015: 112). According to Wishon, this shows that mental events are not ontologically distinct from physical events. Only their special epistemic accessibility distinguishes them from the other physical events (Wishon 2015: 112). In this way, Wishon suggests, Russell final version of neutral monism effectively turns into a version of Russellian Physicalism. We have noted (see section  1)  how Landini’s interpretation of the notion of neutrality (according to (3)—the Possible Constituent View) allows him to argue that neutral monism is compatible with physicalism. As he sees it, Russell is committed to such a version of physicalist neutral monism. Accordingly, Russell is engaged in the project of “constructing both [minds and matter] out of orderings of physical events that are their stages” (Landini 2011: 280). After a detailed discussion (Landini 2011: 291–297), Landini reaches the conclusion that the transient particulars (or events) from which Russell constructs mind and matter “are without intrinsic phenomenal character” (Landini 2011: 297). This makes it possible to regard them as physical entities in good standing. Their neutrality consists in the fact that they are the building blocks of both mental and physical continuants (see Landini 2011: 292). These attempts to combine neutral monism with physicalism, or to reinterpret neutral monism along physicalist lines pose a serious challenge to neutral monism as usually understood. They deny the central claim that the fundamental building blocks of the world are neutral, i.e., nonphysical and nonmental. But no less noteworthy is the degree to which these versions of physicalism depart from more standard versions of physicalism. These nonstandard versions of physicalism agree with neutral monism in holding that physics provides an incomplete picture of the world. The disagreement is limited to a dispute about the nature of the materials that are needed to fill out the picture that physics provides. The neutral monist searches for something that is neither mental nor physical, in the traditional senses of these terms. The physicalists whom we are currently considering hope to find the missing materials in something that is physical, but not physical in the traditional sense of the term. This does suggest that the difference between neutral monism and this sort of physicalism may not be so deep after all (see Chalmers 2015 for more on this question).