 If a quantifier account of ontological commitment is to be applied directly to ordinary language, we need to know which ordinary language quantifiers or uses of quantifiers (if any) are ontologically committing. The same goes for entailment and truthmaker accounts, notwithstanding our relaxed attitude in applying the accounts to ordinary language examples. For on both accounts ontological commitment depends on the entailment of existentially quantified sentences, and we need to know whether the quantifiers of the entailed sentences carry ontological commitment. Quine's considered view was that his criterion of ontological commitment cannot be applied to theories couched in ordinary language.  Before applying the criterion, the theory must be paraphrased into first-order predicate logic (without names); and then, strictly speaking, it is only the first-order theory that carries ontological commitment, not the ordinary language theory. [37]  (The proponent of the theory can be convicted of holding the ontological commitment if—and only if—she accepts the paraphrase.) For Quine, this view reflected his general approach to ordinary language and ontology: the speakers of ordinary language, typically, are not ontologically serious; it is the task of philosophers, not ordinary folk, to determine which prima facie commitments are genuine. There were also specific reasons why a direct application of his criterion to ordinary language might lead to erroneous results. For one thing, theories couched in ordinary language containing non-extensional constructions might have ontological commitments not revealed by quantificational structure (see §1.7.3). For another thing, quantification in ordinary language might fail to carry ontological commitment if it is not objectual, not amenable to the standard Tarskian model-theoretic semantics  (see §1.6.2). Only the quantifiers  of first-order logic, Quine held, are guaranteed to be objectual (because we stipulate their semantics); and only objectual quantification carries ontological commitment.[38] On closer inspection, however, Quine is in no position to claim that theories couched in ordinary language never carry ontological commitment. In giving the truth conditions for the quantifiers of first-order logic, Quine explicitly makes use of ordinary language quantifiers (see, for example, Quine 1970). Thus, his claim that the first-order quantifiers are objectual, and carry ontological commitment, can't help but carry over to the ordinary language quantifiers from which they derive their meaning. There must, then, be some portion of ordinary language that can do all the work, vis-à-vis ontological commitment, that the first-order language was introduced to  do.[39]  This doesn't eliminate the need to seek paraphrases of ordinary language theories (see §4.2 below). But such theories need not be paraphrased into the language of first-order predicate logic; it is enough if they are paraphrased into that regimented portion of ordinary language that can be counted on, in appropriate contexts, to be ontologically serious. The problem that needs to be addressed by the Quinean is then: how to recognize which quantifiers, or which uses of quantifiers, make up this ontologically serious portion of ordinary language. Those who reject the Quinean approach to ontological commitment, on the other hand, need to argue that there is no principled way to separate out those quantifiers, or uses of quantifiers, that carry ontological commitment in ordinary language; or, more radically, that quantification in ordinary language is never ontologically committing. There is a wide spectrum of views on whether ordinary language quantification is ontologically committing. On one end of the spectrum is the view that all ordinary assertive uses of the quantifiers ‘there is’ and ‘some’ are ontologically committing, a view that may be dubbed “allism” (see Lewis 1990, and §1.6.4 above). On this view, discovering the ontological commitments of ordinary speakers is easy. In asserting that “some prime numbers are greater than 100”, we commit ourselves to the existence of numbers; in asserting that “there are properties that all great leaders have in common”, we commit ourselves to the existence of properties. Ontological commitment cannot be avoided by paraphrasing these sentences into the ontologically serious portion of our language because these ordinary assertions are already ontologically serious.[40] Hofweber (2005) agrees that quantification in ordinary language is sometimes ontologically committing, but not always, and not when we quantify over abstract entities, such as numbers and properties, in ordinary (i.e., non-philosophical) contexts. Hofweber claims that there are two distinct readings of ordinary language quantifiers, readings that make different contributions to truth conditions and perform different communicative functions. One reading, which he calls the “domain conditions reading”, is tied to ontology: it places conditions on what exists in reality.  If I say “something fell on my head” (in a standard context), I am thereby committed to the existence of an object meeting the condition “fell on my head”. But, Hofweber argues, there is another reading of ordinary language quantifiers that is not tied to ontology, what he calls the “inferential role reading”. On this reading, the inference from F(t) to F(something) is trivially valid, even in cases where we do not take the term t to refer to anything in reality. On this reading, I can infer “there is someone whom I admire” from “I admire Sherlock Holmes” without my quantified assertion conveying any ontological commitment. Yablo (1998) holds that the distinction between quantified statements that are ontologically committing and those that are not—if it can be made out at all—will rest not on different readings of the quantifiers, but on the distinction between literal and figurative uses of language. Indeed, all parties agree that figurative language can fail to be ontologically committing; one can assert, truly, that she has butterflies in her stomach without thereby being committed to the existence of butterflies. But figurative language is very widespread, even in the sciences. A case can be made, for example, that ordinary talk of numbers is merely a pretense we engage in to more easily communicate facts about the concrete world; and similarly for talk of other abstract entities. The project of applying ontological commitment to ordinary language theories, then, is none too easy: it depends upon being able to demarcate language that is literal from language that is partly figurative; and it depends on there being a stripped-down core of ordinary language that, when interpreted literally, has the representational capacity for fully describing the world. On the far end of the spectrum is the view that ordinary language quantifiers, by themselves, are never ontologically committing. A Carnapian might hold this view as a consequence of her general view that ontological commitment, in a metaphysically loaded sense of the term, is incoherent (see §5.1). A Meinongian might hold this view on the grounds that it is only the existence predicate, not the quantifier, that conveys ontological commitment. The Meinongian, however, is in a weak position when she claims that quantification over non-existent objects fails to be ontologically committing (see §1.6.3); for non-existent objects don't differ from existent objects in their instantiation of properties, or their having natures independent of our theorizing. Azzouni (2004), like the Meinongian, takes the existence predicate to be what conveys ontological commitment; but, unlike the Meinongian, he denies that our talk of non-existent objects requires that they have any sort of independent being. The tie between ontology and quantification is completely severed. All quantification—like Hofweber's “inference role” reading of the quantifier—is ontologically neutral. How do the various views along this spectrum impact the Quinean project of using paraphrase to provide substitutes for ordinary language theories that can be evaluated for ontological commitment? For Quine, as already noted, there is no presumption that ordinary language quantification is ontologically serious.  But it is crucial to Quine's project that some portion of ordinary language can be used for ontologically serious discourse, and that when so used, quantification holds the key to ontological commitment. The allist view, although compatible with the Quinean project, will lead to attributions of ontological commitment wildly different from Quine's own. It makes ontological commitment hard to avoid, leading to overpopulated ontological slums; the desert landscape favored by Quine will be hard to come by.  Hofweber's view is more congenial to the Quinean project, so long as the “domain conditions” reading of the quantifiers can be stipulated to be in effect. That can be done, Quine seems to presuppose, merely by taking an appropriately serious attitude to the discourse in question. Inside the philosophy room—or, better, the ontology room—that attitude is pervasive. Outside the philosophy room, the philosopher is no less free than other speakers to engage in ontologically frivolous discourse (see Quine 1960: 210). Yablo's view would be congenial to the Quinean project if it were possible to make out the line between literal and figurative discourse: Quine's ontologically serious discourse could then be identified with thoroughly literal discourse, assertively uttered. But Yablo is skeptical that any such project can succeed, and sees that as dooming the Quinean approach to ontology. Azzouni's view, of course, is outright incompatible with the Quinean project. It leads towards a substantially different account of ontological commitment in which quantification plays no role (see Azzouni 2004: ch. 4). If criteria of ontological commitment cannot be applied directly to ordinary language, then attributions of ontological commitment to philosophers—or ordinary folk, but we will focus on philosophers—cannot be made just by examining the statements or theories that they accept. Those statements or theories may have prima facie ontological commitments, to be sure, in virtue of their quantificational or referential apparatus. But some method is needed to determine which prima facie commitments count as genuine commitments. Enter here the method of paraphrase endorsed by Quine and his modern day followers. According to this method, we must first ask the philosopher to provide paraphrases of her statements into the regimented portion of our language, paraphrases that are acceptable by standards agreed to in advance. We then apply our criterion of ontological commitment to the regimented paraphrases. If the philosopher provides acceptable paraphrases that are not ontologically committed to Ks, then she is acquitted of commitment to Ks. If the paraphrases she provides are ontologically committed to Ks, then she is guilty of such commitment. If she opts out, refusing to provide paraphrases into the regimented portion of language, then attributions of ontological commitment are moot. The method of paraphrase dominated ontological discussion throughout much of the twentieth century. For a detailed illustration of the method from its heyday, one can do no better than to turn to David and Stephanie Lewis's article “Holes” (Lewis and Lewis 1970), a dialogue between two philosophers, a nominalist and a realist about abstract objects. Suppose that the nominalist accepts statements that are prima facie committed to (immaterial) holes, such as “there are holes in this piece of cheese”. To be acquitted of this prima facie commitment, the nominalist seeks a paraphrase that avoids it—not just for this one sentence, but for ordinary discourse about holes generally. To be acceptable, the paraphrases should preserve the truth of those statements about holes, and the validity of those arguments about holes, that are endorsed by ordinary speakers. As a first stab, she might make use of the predicate ‘perforated’ and paraphrase “there are holes in this piece of cheese” as “the cheese is perforated”. This allows the nominalist to continue to “speak with the vulgar” without taking on a commitment to holes. But the predicate ‘perforated’ won't help in providing paraphrases for statements that count holes, such as “there are seventeen holes in this piece of cheese”. Here the nominalist could introduce a separate predicate, ‘n-perforated’, for each n. That, however, would violate strictures against infinitely many primitive predicates in the regimented language; and it wouldn't be of much help in paraphrasing numerical comparisons such as “there are as many holes in this piece of cheese as there are crackers on this plate”. In the case of discourse about holes, the nominalist does better to turn to a different strategy of paraphrase: ontological reduction.[41]  An ontological reduction maintains the quantificational structure of the discourse, but restricts the underlying domain to uncontroversial entities, in this case, material objects. For example, “there are holes in this piece of cheese” can be taken to quantify, not over immaterial holes, but over material hole-linings; talk of holes is interpreted as talk of the hole-linings that, intuitively, surround the holes. Problems persist: identity conditions for holes and hole-linings do not agree, making trouble for the paraphrasing of identity statements involving holes. But let us end the story here: enough has been said to illustrate how the method of paraphrase might used to avoid prima facie ontological commitments. Avoiding ontological commitment, however, is not the only role that paraphrase plays in ontological disputes. The method of paraphrase has also been used to bring hidden ontological commitments of ordinary discourse to the fore. One prominent example is Davidson's (1967) argument that action sentences are committed to an ontology of events. For example, to explain the logical inference from “John walked slowly” to “John walked”, we should treat the adverb ‘slowly’ as a description of an event over which these sentences tacitly quantify. Paraphrases of action sentences into the regimented portion of our language will thus be ontologically committed to events. A second well-known example is Lewis's argument from Counterfactuals that modal discourse, as he understands it, is committed to possible worlds: It is uncontroversially true that things might be otherwise than they are. … Ordinary language permits the paraphrase: there are many ways things could have been besides the way they actually are. … I believe permissible paraphrases of what I believe; taking the paraphrase at its face value, I therefore believe in the existence of entities that might be called ‘ways things could have been’. I prefer to call them ‘possible worlds’. (Lewis 1973: 84) In both of these cases, a version of the method of paraphrase is used to support, rather than avoid, commitment to controversial ontology. The method of paraphrase provides a clear, well-defined strategy—some would say the only such strategy[42]—for  determining the ontological commitments of the two parties to an ontological dispute. But there have been objections to the method, both early and late. Early on, Alston (1958) posed more or less the following dilemma (see also Jackson 1980). Either the paraphrase and the sentence being paraphrased have the same truth conditions, or they do not. If they do, then they cannot differ in their ontological commitments; for the role of truth conditions, in part, is to specify what must exist in order for the sentence to be true. But then the method of paraphrase cannot be used to avoid ontological commitment. Suppose then that the paraphrase and the sentence being paraphrased do not have the same truth conditions.  Then the paraphrase does nothing to support the claim that the original sentence can be used without incurring ontological commitment.  Indeed, whatever the precise relation between the paraphrase and the sentence being paraphrased, nothing justifies reading the ontological commitments of the original sentence off the paraphrase rather than the other way around (compare the neo-Fregean account in §5.2). The best response on behalf of the defender of the method of paraphrase is to reject the assumption that the goal of paraphrase is to capture the truth conditions, or the ontological commitments, of the original. For Quine, an acceptable paraphrase is just a sentence that “serves any purposes [of the original] that seem worth serving” (Quine 1960: 214). A stronger notion of paraphrase is ruled out because the truth conditions, and so the ontological commitments, of sentences in ordinary language are, for the most part, semantically indeterminate. In applying the method of paraphrase, we ask the philosopher to make her ordinary language theory precise through the process of regimentation, not to uncover the hidden commitments of the original theory.[43] If she complies, then the ontological commitments of the regimented theory can be attributed to her.  But there is no going back to assign ontological commitments to the original theory couched in ordinary language.[44] More recent critics of the method of paraphrase see the search for paraphrase as fundamentally misguided. Sider (1999), for example, suggests that the project of discovering the ontological commitments of ordinary language should proceed by searching, not for paraphrases, but for underlying truths (see also Melia 1995 and Yablo 1999 for related critiques). Suppose some sentence in ordinary language that we use in describing the world is prima facie committed to Ks. Nonetheless, the attitude that we take to the sentence may be something weaker than believing the sentence true. In that case, our use of that sentence need not commit us to Ks, even if all acceptable paraphrases are committed to Ks. To get at our commitments, we should look, not to paraphrases, but to the truths that underlie the descriptive role of the sentence; our commitment is the commitment of those underlying truths. Roughly, we can say that the underlying truths are true propositions that would still have been true and would have been sufficient for the truth of the original sentence, if there had been Ks (see Sider 1999: 332–3). To illustrate with a simple example, consider the sentence: “the number of moons of Jupiter is sixty-seven”. Suppose a philosopher uses this sentence to describe the world, but does not want to accept its prima facie commitment to numbers. If, as seems plausible, the underlying truths for the sentence are just propositions stating what physical objects are in the vicinity of Jupiter and what their motions are, then the sentence is ontologically committed only to those physical objects, not to numbers. We may not know what these underlying truths are, or be able to express them in ordinary language. That matters not. For, unlike the method of paraphrase, the philosopher is under no obligation to provide the underlying truths in order to acquit herself of the prima facie commitments. She can justify her use of sentences that are prima facie committed to numbers as long as she holds that there are underlying truths, and that the underlying truths are not so committed.