 Alvin Goldman (2006) has distinguished a descriptive from a normative epistemological problem of other minds.  Section 1  and  section 2  were largely concerned with the latter; this section will concern itself with the former. The descriptive problem is associated with what Goldman terms mind reading (or mentalizing). Mind reading involves the capacity to think about mind and is a second or higher order activity that involves representing or conceptualizing others (as well as oneself) as “loci of mental life” (Goldman 2006: 3). While many species of animal may be thought to have minds, only some will be capable of representing another as having minds. Questions of justification and conceptual difficulty are not of concern to the descriptive theorist, nor are metaphysical questions concerning the nature of mind; what concerns the descriptive epistemologist is how what she says measures up with what is being learned in the empirical disciplines of developmental psychology and neuroscience. Work on the descriptive problem is developing at a rapid pace and, while at first attention in all the relevant disciplines was concentrated on two prominent accounts of mind reading—theory-theory and simulation theory—a variety of accounts now exist which challenge both of these accounts (see  §3.2). Theory-theory has its roots in a paper by Premack and Woodruff (1978), which argued that certain problem-solving behavior observed in chimpanzees should be taken as evidence that they possess a theory of mind, as evidence that they are able to make predictions about the behavior of others that impute to them unobservable mental states. Premack and Woodruff take this imputation to be a rather primitive and unsophisticated reaction to the observation of certain behavior, so natural in both humans and chimpanzees that it would take an effort to suppress  it.[14] In their commentaries on this paper (1978), Dennett, Bennett, and Harman pointed out that further experimentation was required in order to determine whether a creature possesses the concept of belief (which concept is required in order to have thoughts about another’s mental states). In particular, it would need to be shown that the creature possesses the concept of false belief. Wimmer and Perner (1983) devised a test that purported to show just that. The original test was carried out with normally developing human children and taken to show that the capacity to represent false beliefs is present in 4 to 6 year olds, but absent in 3 year  olds.[15]  Two different proposals have been put forward to explain this developmental change. One proposal (see, e.g., Gopnik & Wellman 1992) suggests that the child possesses a naïve psychological theory that it uses to explain and predict the behavior of others and that gets revised by the child over time. The other proposal (see, e.g., Leslie & Roth 1993) suggests a native, domain-specific (or modular) mechanism that matures at a certain point as what explains the child’s success with the false-belief test. This approach to understanding how we attribute mental states to others has several notable features: (i) it dovetails with the dominant approach to solving the knowledge-of-other-minds problem as it proposes that our belief here is the result of postulating mental states as the best explanation of observed behavior; (ii) it dovetails with a functionalist account of mind; and (iii) it can solve the asymmetry problem, as some hold the child comes to attribute mental states to herself on the same model as she does others (Gopnik 2009). All three features of this theory have come under criticism. This approach has also been challenged by further empirical work that purports to show that infants as young as 15 months have the concept of false belief (Onishi & Baillargeon 2005). One suggestion to accommodate this data is that we postulate two systems: one that operates in the infant and that is fast, efficient, inflexible and non-normative, and another that develops later (and operates in tandem with the earlier one in the mature human) and that is effortful, inflexible, normative and language-dependent (Apperly and Butterfill 2009; for a good summary of this work and a critique of it, see Jacob forthcoming). Robert Gordon, Jane Heal and Alvin Goldman propose an alternative to the theory-theory account of how to understand the attribution of mental states to others. Heal identifies in theory-theory a scientific motivation that runs roughshod over important differences between human beings and the rest of the natural world. While theory-theorists extend a style of understanding from its application in connection with the latter to the former, Heal and others propose that we come to understand what the other persons are thinking “from the inside”, that we “exploit the fact that we are or have minds” (Heal 1998 [2003: 84]). Heal is particularly concerned with the question, What further thoughts will a person have given what thoughts I already know her to have? (Heal (1998) also traces out further questions about others that may concern us.) Gordon (1986, 1995) insists that simulation theory must be formulated in such a way as to avoid reliance on both introspection and inference from oneself to the other. Rather than imagine what I would do in your situation, he suggests that I imagine being you in your situation. In this way, thinking about others is taken to parallel understanding of one’s own future behavior: one predicts what one will do by imagining or pretending that the world is a certain way. Simulation theory has its roots in Verstehen theories favored by sociologists and historians such as Collingwood and Dilthey (as well as work by Lipps on empathy; for an overview here see Stueber 2018). Simulation theory was thought to be given neurophysiological backing by the discovery of mirror neurons in the pre-motor cortex and in Broca’s area of the human brain that are activated both when an individual acts and when she observes the actions of another (Gallese and Goldman 1998; Gallese 2001; Rizzolatti et al. 1996). (For an overview of the different versions of simulation theory that have been advocated see Barlassina and Gordon 2017.) Over the years theory-theory and simulation theory have moved closer towards each other, giving rise to various hybrid accounts of how it is that we attribute minds to others. But there are those who challenge both theories and any hybrid versions that they have spawned. One such challenge arises from Gallagher & Zahavi 2008 who urge that we cast aside both third-person (theory) and first-person (simulation) approaches, and concentrate instead on second-person interaction. (In its development in Gallagher’s work, this approach has come to be known as “interaction theory”.) Influenced by work in phenomenology and embodied cognition, Gallagher and Zahavi propose that our attribution of mental states to others is the result of perception of and reaction to behavior understood as expressive of mental life. Furthermore, they suggest that the activation of mirror neurons be understood as serving action or response preparation (rather than as supporting simulation, cf.  §3.1).  Drawing on the work of developmental psychologists such as Meltzoff, Trevarthen, and Hobson, they identify two forms of intersubjectivity: a primary form identifiable in early infancy that involves a differential response to persons and inanimate objects; and a secondary form when the behavior of persons is interpreted “in terms of their goals and intentions set in contextualized situations” (Gallagher & Zahavi 2008: 190). In addition to primary and secondary intersubjectivity, and at the point when the child has language, it is suggested that a more nuanced way of understanding others becomes possible through the development of communicative and narrative practices (Hutto 2008; Gallagher & Hutto 2008). Gallagher and Zahavi reject inferential accounts of how we know others in favor of a direct perceptual one, and they understand behavior (e.g., gesture, facial expressions, contextualized actions) to be constitutive of mental life. Importantly, they point out that one shouldn’t conceive of interpersonal understanding as if it was merely and primarily a question of bridging the gap between two isolated subjects. Interpersonal understanding occurs in a context and through “our shared engagement in the common world” (Gallagher & Zahavi 2008: 190; cf. Gurwitsch 1977 [1979]). This work aims to move us away from an overly-intellectualized way of thinking of other minds and to turn our attention to the world that we live and act in with others. The emphasis here is less on individual beliefs and desires than in shared intentions and goals. As Gallagher says in one place, “social cognition is often nothing more than…social interaction” (2008: 541). Interaction theory can be seen as an extension of enactivist theories of perception that understand perception as a highly complex action-oriented phenomenon, incorporating both meaning and emotion: to see an object is to see it as affording me opportunity for action, and this opportunity is taken to be part of how I make sense of the world and what gives the world value for me (cf. Clarke, Noe, Varela et al). The extension of this idea allows that social interactions also constitute for me “novel domains of possibilities for sense making” (De Jaegher 2009). To see the other person is to see her as affording interaction; in this regard, direct perception is direct enactive perception. Interactionist theorists have suggested concrete proposals for empirical work in psychology and neuroscience in the hopes of moving this research away from what they see as individualism and methodological solipsism (De Jaegher, DiPaulo, & Gallagher 2010). Rather than taking individual agents to be constitutive of social interaction, these interaction theorists take them to be constituted by their interaction with others. Person model theory challenges theory-theory (TT) and simulation theory (ST)—as well as interaction theory (IT; Newen 2015, Newen & Schlicht 2009). Person model theory finds certain limitations in each of the theories that it opposes. In the place of the two forms of intersubjectivity recommended by Gallagher and Zahavi, person theory suggests that the infant works with a “non-conceptual person-schema” which develops—through the combined work of observation and narrative—into “conceptualized person-images”. Thus, it is proposed that the understanding of persons is a step-by-step process of enrichment, central to which is the acceptance of a multiplicity of strategies (TT, ST, and IT among them). Which strategy is deployed is dependent upon such things as context, how similar or different the other is from oneself, whether the understanding is of an emotion or a propositional attitude, and the complexity of the mental state. The idea of the deployment of a multiplicity of strategies is not unique to Person Theory. Gallagher and Fiebich (forthcoming) argue for what they call a “pluralist approach” to the understanding of others, drawing on inference, simulation, direct perception, and/or interaction—depending on the situation (cf. Nichols & Stich 2003). What this work highlights is how much may be involved when it comes to understanding others.