 The traditional epistemological problem of other minds is often associated with scepticism. The sceptic raises a doubt about the possibility of knowledge in connection with the mind of another, a doubt which is thought to follow from a more general doubt raised by Descartes concerning our knowledge of the external world. This latter doubt arises in stages, each of which is designed to draw us into a more wide-reaching scepticism: at stage one it is observed that the senses sometimes deceive; at stage two the possibility of an extended dream is considered; and at stage three the possibility is introduced that there is an Evil Demon deceiving me to think that there is a world beyond how things appear. It is with the third stage that Descartes thought we encounter the possibility of universal doubt about an entire domain, in this case the external world. Descartes has found a way to retreat into his own mind, where he claims to find both knowledge and truth: I can know how things appear to me; external things are now in doubt. Cartesian doubt is radical and it has been raised by philosophers not just in connection with our knowledge of the external world, but also of the past, induction, and other minds. In connection with other minds, we might press Descartes’ first sceptical consideration, thus: I am sometimes deceived about what another is thinking or feeling. But, as with the external world, this is not sufficient for radical doubt concerning others. Radical doubt may be thought to arise when one presses the third sceptical consideration, the possibility that an Evil Demon (or mad scientist) has contrived that all others apart from myself are automata/zombies—non-thinking, non-feeling individuals who move in a manner similar to the way I move. We can associate a ‘thin’ sceptical problem with the former doubt and a ‘thick’ sceptical problem with the latter (Avramides 2015). The former is a problem we grapple with in our everyday lives; the latter is a distinctively philosophical problem. It is the thick skeptical problem that leads to the possibility of solipsism—that I am alone in the universe. Once one teases out a thin from a thick problem, one can ask the following: (i) does any proposed response to the thick problem help with the thin?; (ii) does having knowledge (in any domain) depend upon a solution to the thick problem?; and (iii) are there any further questions that can be raised with respect to other minds beyond those associated with these two sceptical problems? It is fair to say that little to no consideration was paid to question (i) in the past. It is the threat of solipsism that largely preoccupied philosophers—at least until more recently. (ii) has received much discussion in recent decades. Epistemologists who favor an externalist approach (e.g., Goldman, Nozick, Dretske) concentrate on the question of what others think and feel. In line with the general externalist approach, these philosophers hold that there can be knowledge despite there being no response to the radical sceptical challenge. Others agree that having knowledge does not require responding to this challenge, but not because they believe that there is no response here but because they believe that the correct account of knowledge leaves no room for such a challenge (McDowell 1982). With respect to (iii), Zahavi (2014) has identified a further question that he labels the why question. In our everyday encounters with, and understanding of, others we want to know not only what they think and feel, but also why they think and feel as they do and what this means to them. Not everyone takes the epistemological problem here to be a radical skeptical one. Some see the problem as arising from reflection on an apparent asymmetry in the way I know about my own and another’s mind: in my own case, at least most of the time, I know what I think and feel directly and without inference from any evidence (the qualification here is designed to reflect the fact that one can, at times, learn about one’s own mental states from others—see Austin 1946 [1979: 110]); in the case of others, all access to what they think or feel is thought to be indirect, mediated by the other’s behavior. Hyslop, for example, writes, “the problem of other minds is generated by an asymmetry in respect of knowledge” (1995: 6; cf. Davidson 1991 [2001]). Gomes (2018) has labeled the epistemological problem raised by attention to this asymmetry the problem of sources, which he distinguishes from the problem of error. Gomes finds the problem of sources in the work of Austin (1946 [1979]) who begins his discussion of other minds by asking, “How do we know that, for example, another individual is angry?”, a question which Austin distinguishes from, “Do we (ever) know…?” (cf. Cassam 2007 and Nozick 1981). It is worth pausing to consider the seriousness of the problem of knowing others. While some draw a parallel between the problem of gaining knowledge of the past and of another mind, there is an important asymmetry to be noted here: in the case of the past it is at least logically possible that there should be direct knowledge, while in the case of another mind such knowledge seems to be logically ruled out. As A.J. Ayer writes: It can be argued that one’s position to observe a past event is due to the accident of one’s position in time…. But it is not an accident that one is not someone else. (1953 [1954: 216–217]) (Discussions linking knowledge of other minds and the past provide a rich vein of philosophical discussion; see, for example, Dummett 1969, Wright 1980, and McDowell 1998.) It may be thought that there could be a way of knowing another’s mind—say by telepathy—and that it is simply a contingent fact that this is not a way that is open to human beings. Telepathy would allow one to know another’s thoughts and feelings by coming to share them. The problem, however, is that if I have your experiences, then those experiences are mine and not yours. As Ayer writes: “In this respect telepathy is no better than the telephone” (1953 [1954: 196]; cf. Austin 1946 and Wisdom 1940). Philosophers, thus, find themselves saddled with the question, How do I know that others have minds? One can put the emphasis on the word “know” and raise a sceptical question parallel to the one Descartes raises in connection with our knowledge of the external world, or one can put the emphasis on the word “how” and question the source of our knowledge given that I am not in a position to have direct knowledge of the mind of another. While it may be the case that different considerations can give rise to an epistemological problem concerning other minds, on the whole what appears to have pre-occupied philosophers in the period under consideration (mid-twentieth century) was the question of solipsism, the question of whether I am alone in the universe. While it is often accepted that I cannot be certain that I am not alone, it is thought that it can be shown that we have good reason to believe that the others I encounter are like me in having thoughts and feelings. One form of reasoning has been taken to be “traditional” in this connection: the argument from analogy (Blackburn 1994). Analogical reasoning cites similarities between two things and uses this as support for concluding that further similarities may be taken to exist. Like all forms of inferential reasoning, analogical reasoning is employed in order to expand knowledge in the face of uncertainty (Bartha 2016). A statement of the argument from analogy can be found in the writing of J.S. Mill. In reply to the question, By what evidence do I know, or by what considerations am I led to believe… that the walking and speaking figures which I see and hear, have sensations and thoughts, or in other words, possess Minds? Mill writes: First, they have bodies like me, which I know in my own case, to be the antecedent condition of feelings; and because, secondly, they exhibit the acts, and outward signs, which in my own case I know by experience to be caused by feelings. (1865 [1872: 243]) While this argument was once popular (see, e.g., Russell 1923; Hampshire 1952), it soon came to be considered unfit for purpose due to the following considerations. Firstly, it was pointed out that while this way of proceeding may work in certain domains, in the case of other minds the conclusion is logically uncheckable (Locke 1968). Secondly, it was considered problematic that this way of extending one’s knowledge proceeds from a single case (Locke 1968). And thirdly, it was claimed that the very first premise of this argument (I know in my own case) is problematic (Malcolm 1958). Various attempts have been made to salvage the argument. Against the first of these considerations it has been pointed out that we successfully appeal to analogy when extending our knowledge from the present to the past. However, Hyslop and Jackson (1972) remind us that this defense fails to register the fact that the impossibility of checking the conclusion in the case of other minds is logical (cf.  §1),  and prefer to defend appeal to analogy here by suggesting that, while this is true, it is not “obviously relevant”. They also suggest that the fact that the conclusion here cannot be verified may be “neutralized” by the fact that it also cannot be refuted (1972: 169–170). Hyslop and Jackson also propose an alternative to the standard defense of the argument from analogy from the second of the above considerations. The standard defense insists that the argument does not proceed from a single case and that there are innumerable instances and many different contexts in which one observes a mental state and its associated behavior (Ayer 1956: 219–222); cf. Mill who writes that analogy is an “inferior degree of inductive evidence” that only works by providing one with an hypothesis which is then verified by further correlations, 1865 [1872: 260]). According to Hyslop & Jackson, however, there is no need to appeal to multiple cases here just so long as one can establish a link between mental states and behavior, something they claim can be done from observation of one’s own case (cf. Hill 1984). Hyslop (1995) warns that we must be careful here not to appeal to the (invalid) principle that like effects (behavior) have like causes (mental states)—your behavior may have a purely physical cause. We should instead appeal to the (valid) principle that like causes have like effects: what I observe in my own case leads me to hypothesize that my mental states are caused by physical states of my body, and I can argue that like physical states in others will cause like mental states. This, in effect, is to invoke the principle of the Uniformity of Nature; it is this principle that Hyslop believes lies at the heart of the argument from analogy. While many consider that generalization from a single instance is a crucial weakness in the argument from analogy, Hyslop takes this to be the argument’s strength. Indeed, he holds that the other main contender in the field, the argument from scientific inference/best explanation fails precisely because it does not take into account a crucial dependence on our own case when it comes to knowledge of other minds (cf.  §1.2). The third of the arguments that have been brought to bear against the argument from analogy requires careful consideration. The very premise that Hyslop believes recommends this way of supporting one’s belief in other minds is the one that some have thought to be irremediably problematic. Malcolm, inspired by the later work of Wittgenstein, has suggested that the premise—I know from my own case what it is like to think and feel—is committed to what he calls the “fundamental error” of thinking that one learns what thoughts and feelings are from one’s own case (Malcolm 1958: 974). This way of coming to learn about mind is associated with what is sometimes thought of as an ‘inward glance’ or introspection (cf. Locke 1689). It has been argued that this way of learning about mind or mental states is committed to the possibility of a private language (Wittgenstein 1953; Malcolm 1954). According to Malcolm, Wittgenstein advances both an “internal” and an “external” attack on the possibility of such a language (Malcolm 1954 [1966: 75]). The internal attack aims to show that, while a genuine language requires that one be able to articulate correctness conditions for the application of a word, it is not possible to articulate such conditions when the referent of the word is not intersubjectively available. As Wittgenstein points out: “Whatever is going to seem right to me is right. And that only means that here we can’t talk about ‘right’” (1953: §258). (For a statement of the “external” attack here see  §2.)  The private language argument aside, the suggestion that I can come to know about mental states from my own case leads to a conception of mind as something not observable in behavior but as something lying behind and causing behavior. Malcolm contrasts this way of thinking with what he labels a criterial view of the relationship between mind and behavior. Much ink has been spilled over trying to understand this proposed alternative way of thinking of mind in relation to behavior (see  §1.3).  However we understand this proposal, it is important to appreciate the difficulties thought to be associated with the idea that one learns from one’s own case what it is to think and feel: it is believed to lead inexorably to solipsism. (This was something arguably first appreciated by Thomas Reid; see  §4.1).  It should, however, be noted that solipsism comes in two varieties: epistemological and conceptual. While the argument from analogy is proposed as a way of avoiding the former, it is arguable that it is really the latter to which Malcolm and others are drawing our attention. In effect, the claim here is that use of the argument from analogy as a way of avoiding epistemological solipsism (the only mind I can know is my own) falls foul of conceptual solipsism (the only mind I can think about is my own). Discussion of the conceptual problem in connection with other minds may be thought to take us in a direction at odds with that taken when one approaches these matters from an epistemological perspective (for the conceptual problem see  §2.) The argument from best explanation has been advocated as an advance on the argument from analogy. While Hyslop insists that any justification for my belief in other minds must make crucial reference to one’s own case, it has been argued that not needing to rely on such reference makes the argument from best explanation preferable as an account of how we justify our belief here (Pargetter 1984). Whether or not one pauses to assess the relative merits of these two ways of defending the rationality of our belief in other minds, what is undoubtedly the case is that the argument from best explanation is—either explicitly or implicitly—a form of argument that enjoys wide acceptance today. David Chalmers, for example, writes, “It …seems that this [argument from best explanation] is as good a solution to the problem of other minds as we are going to get” (1996: 246). While the argument from analogy was once popular in science (Hyslop & Jackson (1972) cite the example of the discovery of helium on the sun to have a characteristic spectrum by analogy with the characteristic spectrum of helium on earth) in more recent times science has tended to proceed in accordance with the principle that it is rational to believe that hypothesis that provides the best available explanation of a particular phenomenon at a given time. This style of argument is sometimes referred to as abduction, and it is placed alongside deduction and enumerative induction as another form of inferential reasoning. While simple enumerative inductive takes one from certain observations to the conclusion that one can expect more of the same, abduction allows for the introduction of entities that are not just unobserved, but that are unobservable (Lipton 2000; Harman 1965). It is claimed that my reason for believing that others have minds similar to my own can be taken to be the same as the scientific realist’s reason for believing in the existence of electrons or other theoretical entities. On this way of thinking, mental states are taken to be inner states of an individual that provide the best explanation of the behavior we observe in others; any other explanation would be implausible. Pargetter (1984) considers the following as implausible alternative hypotheses: (i) God is working others like puppets; (ii) I am unique in having mental states as the cause of behavior; and (iii) that others have mental states but they are of an entirely different nature to my own. According to Pargetter, the argument from best explanation is able to bypass all criticisms standardly brought to bear against the argument from analogy, as it relies solely on the explanatory power of the proposed hypothesis—in this case, that others have minds. This form of reasoning is also held to be superior to reasoning from analogy as it can be used to establish the existence of minds in individuals of other species whose behavior may not be similar to mine or who think and feel in ways that are dissimilar to the way that I think and feel. It may also be used to justify the belief in minds of (abnormal) humans who may either behave very differently or think and feel very differently from their conspecifics. Melnyk (1994) has argued that there is an important disanalogy between the scientific realist’s reason for believing in theoretical entities and an ordinary person’s reason for believing that other people have minds. His argument rests on the observation that gross behavioral evidence is insufficient for belief in another mind without additional reference to what one knows from one’s own case. Melnyk can be read as advocating a hybrid account of our knowledge here, incorporating elements from the argument from analogy as a supplement to the inference from best explanation. But he also makes the following, important, observation: “A complete response to the problem of other minds seems obliged to incorporate more than one approach, and may have to incorporate several” (1994: 487). This is an observation others have also begun to advocate (see  §3.2). It has been suggested that an alternative to the view that mind lies behind and serves as the cause of behavior is the view that behavior serves as the criterion of mind (see  §1.1).  The former conception of mind in relation to behavior is associated with the following ideas: (i) my mind is private to me; (ii) I am both infallible and incorrigible with respect to my own mental states; and (iii) I can know my own mental state without having to observe anything about my body. This picture of mind is bolstered by the thought that, whatever another person says or does, it is always possible that they are deceiving me about what is going on in their minds—an extreme version of which leads to the thought that I am entirely deceived and all others are mere automata or zombies. In short, this conception of mind leads to the traditional epistemological problem of other minds. Standard responses to this problem—arguments from analogy and best explanation—draw a parallel between knowledge of another’s mind and explanation in science. In this connection Wittgenstein writes: “Misleading parallel: psychology treats of processes in the psychical sphere, as does physics in the physical” (1953: §571). In The Blue Book (24–25) Wittgenstein contrasts the business of citing criteria with that of giving symptoms in answer to the question, “How do you know?” He associates the giving of symptoms with the making of hypotheses; he associates the citing of criteria with “the grammar (the use)” of a word or with linguistic convention (1958: 23). It has not proved an easy thing for philosophers to understand what Wittgenstein means here (see Albritton 1959; Shoemaker 1963; Kenny 1967; Baker 1974). What one can say is that a criterial relation between mind and behavior is designed to be distinct from, on the one hand, logical entailment, and on the other, inductive inference. Some see a connection between a criterial relation here and the possibility of perceptual knowledge of another’s mind (McDowell 1982, Hacker 1997; see  §1.4.1).  Those that advocate a criterial relation between mind and behavior also tend to understand the problem of other minds to be a conceptual one (see  §2).  As well as being associated with the rejection of a certain conception of mind that can be labeled ‘Cartesian’, appeal to a criterial relationship between mind and behavior is often thought to form part of an anti-sceptical stance in connection with others. Some have seen in the appeal to criteria nothing but a form of behaviorism. Chihara and Fodor (1965) are among such philosophers, and their work has served to turn the tide against talk of criteria as a way of understanding the relationship between mental states and behavior. Chihara and Fodor sum up the Wittgensteinian argument as follows: if we are justified in claiming that one can tell or determine that a predicate ‘Y’ applies on the basis of the presence of X then either X is a criterion of Y or X can be shown to be correlated with Y. They then claim that this overlooks the possibility that in some cases the justification for the application of a predicate rests on an appeal to the “simplicity, plausibility and predictive adequacy of an explanatory system as a whole” (1965: 411). They point out that scientists use this method of explanation when it comes to the detection of particles that are not directly observable (see  §1.2).  Chihara and Fodor agree with the Wittgensteinian who holds that the child does not learn about mental states by introspection but rather learns about complex relations between mental states and behavior in the course of learning her language, but they point out that part of what the child learns is how to explain another’s behavior by reference to her thoughts and feelings and suggest that this may be the result either of explicit training or of an innate capacity. Whether one is persuaded by Chihara and Fodor’s position against appeal to criteria will depend in part upon one’s assessment of the correctness of thinking about mental states on the model of unobservables in science. Furthermore, it may be thought that to understand mental states to be entirely explanatory phenomena is arguably to lose sight of the subjective aspect of these states. Finally, to think of mental states as lying behind and causing behavior may be thought to break what some see as a deep connection between mentality and behavior, thereby opening up the possibility that I am alone in the universe (Avramides 2013). Many have continued to defend a criterial approach here. Crispin Wright and John McDowell have written extensively on this topic, each offering a very different interpretation of the notion of a criterion. While the debate here is complex and interwoven with issues such as realist vs anti-realist semantics, there is one thread in this debate that is particularly relevant to the epistemological problem of other minds: the question of whether criteria should be thought of as defeasible or indefeasible. Wright rightly sees this question as connected with the question of whether appeal to criteria can provide one with an anti-sceptical stance. Wright’s own understanding of criteria turns on an important distinction between constituting knowledge that P and an entitlement to a knowledge-claim that P. While a sceptic can always challenge the truth of any claim to know that which lies beyond the cognitive reach of the subject (examples here include the past and other minds), Wright suggests that the sceptic can make no inroads when one pulls in one’s horns and simply makes a statement about the reasonableness of one’s belief or claim to know in such cases. He then argues that reasonableness is secured if one can show that the criteria for the claim that, for example, another is in pain are satisfied and one knows of no consideration that would defeat the claim—in other words, just so long as one is using a word, e.g., “pain”, in accordance with the conventions in play in one’s linguistic community. It is a consequence of this understanding of criteria that, while one may be in the best position to make a claim to know that Tom is in pain by observing his behavior, one’s claim is defeasible—that is, it is open to being shown to be mistaken in the light of further evidence. Importantly, to hold that behavioral criteria are defeasible is not, according to Wright, to be committed to understanding behavior as ‘outer’ evidence (a symptom) of the other’s ‘inner’ mental states. Wright admits, however, that his position leaves room for scepticism: “a form of scepticism that is endemic in the very practice of assertion” (1984: [1993:  389–390]).[1] McDowell is not content to concede any ground to the sceptic, and believes that appeal to criteria can confer (sceptic-proof) knowledge. But for this to be the case, criteria must be understood to be indefeasible (McDowell 1982). McDowell finds an incompatibility between, on the one hand, the legitimacy of a knowledge ascription and, on the other, the possible of its falsity (its defeasibility). McDowell is not persuaded by Wright’s understanding of criteria, and proposes an alternative to it. McDowell’s understanding of criteria is thought to form a part of his defense of a direct, perceptual, account of our knowledge of other minds (see  §1.4.1). Those who defend either the argument from analogy or from best explanation are firmly of the view that any knowledge we may have of other minds (or any justification there may be for our belief in them) must be indirect. They accept that, while our knowledge of our own mental states is direct, our knowledge of the mental states of others must proceed by reasoning from what we observe—the other’s behavior—to what we cannot observe—the other’s mental  states.[2]  The idea that the mind of another is not directly observable is one that seems common to many philosophers. As early as the fifth century AD, St. Augustine writes: “For even when a living body is moved, there is no way opened to our eyes to see the mind, a thing which cannot be seen by the eyes…” (De Trinitate 140; cf. Descartes 1641, Second Meditation; and Berkeley 1710, Principle 148) The idea that we should have direct knowledge of another’s mental states has also come under fire more recently by Colin McGinn, who writes that direct perceptual reports specifying the mental states of another “seem definitely wrong” (1984: 123, n. 2; cf. Plantinga 1966: 441). Direct knowledge is often associated with perception and it is this, as we have just seen, that so many philosophers have rejected in association with other minds. While our knowledge of the world of things around us is taken to come about through perception, it has been thought that knowledge of another’s mind cannot come about by this  means.[3]  Nonetheless, we find Nathalie Duddington writing, “My object in the present paper is to maintain that our knowledge of other minds is as direct and immediate as our knowledge of physical things” (1919: 147). It is not at all clear that philosophers at the time paid much attention to this very interesting paper, but philosophers today have found in Duddington’s work a precursor for an idea that has come to be taken very seriously—at least in some  circles.[4] Many analytic philosophers in the past few decades have written in defense of the idea that our knowledge of other minds comes about through perception (e.g., McDowell 1978 and 1982, Dretske 1969 and 1976, Cassam 2007, McNeil 2012, Stout 2010, and Green, 2010). The idea is also defended by some philosophers writing in the phenomenological tradition  (§1.4.2).  Many philosophers working today bring together work in both traditions in defense of this idea (e.g., Overgaard forthcoming, Krueger 2014, and J. Smith 2010). Consideration of issues to do with the self in relation to others has been thought by some to have the power to bridge the chasm between these two traditions in philosophy. Those attracted by the idea that our knowledge of other minds comes about through perception often appeal to the following in defense of their position: we all acknowledge that we often claim to be in the position where we can just see that another is angry, in pain, and the like. These philosophers are careful to point out that we don’t always claim that this is the case and we do not claim it with respect to all mental states, but they hold that attention to such cases can teach us that the mental is not always “withdrawn from direct engagement with the world” (McDowell 1995: 413). Duddington writes that to say that knowledge of another’s mind can be direct and immediate is to say that there is no veil or barrier intervening between the knowing subject and what is known—it is not to say either that our knowledge here is complete or that there are no difficulties that stand in the way of our attainment of such knowledge (1919: 167; cf. McDowell 1982). McDowell has written that we should not jib at, or interpret away, the common-sense thought that…one can literally perceive, in another person’s facial expression or his behavior, that he is in pain, and not just infer that he is in pain from what one perceives. (1978: 305) McDowell’s perceptual account involves two crucial moves, one concerning our understanding of experience and the other concerning our understanding of behavior. He proposes that we think of our experience as being “open” to the world, allowing objects to figure in it directly; and in a parallel fashion he proposes that we think of behavior as giving expression to mental states thereby allowing them to figure in behavior (McDowell 1982, 1986). According to McDowell, when one has an experience of genuinely expressive behavior, one is not actually experiencing the mental state of the other; nonetheless, behavior in the veridical case should not be thought to fall short of mind in such a way as to allow for the possibility of its total absence. McDowell believes that this understanding of experience and behavior can support (sceptic-proof) knowledge of both the world and other minds. The challenge for McDowell is to explain how error can arise in both cases. To accommodate error, McDowell introduces a disjunctive understanding of both experience and behavior (McDowell 1982; Soteriou 2016). Considering the former we can say: either our experience is such as to yield access to the world or it is such as to yield only apparent access. Considering the latter we can say: either the observed behavior is such as to be expressive of the other’s mentality or it only appears to be such. In both cases the way things seem to the experiencing subject is such as to fall short of infallible knowledge as to which disjunct is in question (McDowell 1986 [1998: 240]). We may be fallible with respect to how things are in the world, but McDowell insists that we must be careful to locate this fallibility in the right place. We should not conclude, as so many have, that all experience may be fallible; this is the move that paves the way for radical scepticism. It is, rather, our perceptual capacities that are fallible: sometimes they provide us with experience which is veridical and sometimes they do not (McDowell 2006). The important thing is that, when experience is veridical, we can take it to give us (sceptic-proof) knowledge of the world. When it comes to our knowledge of other minds, the disjunctive move allows us to hold that, where behavior is genuinely expressive of another’s mental life, there our experience of her behavior will yield (sceptic-proof) knowledge of another’s mental life. Genuinely expressive behavior is being thought of not as evidence (a symptom) of another’s mental life but as a criterion of it. This, McDowellian, understanding of criteria—in contrast to Wright’s  (§1.3)—requires  that we accept behavior in at least some cases to be expressive of, a criterion of, mental states. So understood, behavioral criteria are indefeasible. This is not to say that error is not possible, as the person I encounter may be deceiving me. However, in such cases the criterion for the mental state is not satisfied. The important thing is that this possibility should not be taken to negate the fact that, when the other person is not deceiving me, my experience of her behavior can result in (sceptic-proof) knowledge that she is, for example, in pain. The genuine possibility that others may deceive me should not be taken to open up the possibility that all others may be zombies and that I am in the world  alone.[5]  (We may here consider something Wittgenstein writes (1992, 94e): “But of course it isn’t true that we are never certain about the mental processes in someone else. In countless cases we are.”) Dretske’s defense of our direct, perceptual knowledge of another mind differs significantly from the one that is found in the work of McDowell or Duddington. Dretske is not interested in scepticism, or in giving an account of knowledge that is sceptic-proof. He is interested only in saying how it is that we come to know what others think and feel, to identify the source of our knowledge here (cf.  §1).  While we often say that we just can see that another thinks something or feels a certain way, it is also thought that there is an obstacle to taking perception to be a possible source of knowledge here. Dretske identifies the obstacle here to arise from the fact that it is generally thought that another’s mind is unobservable: while one can see the smile, the clenched fist or the hunched shoulder, one cannot see what lies behind these things (Dretske 1973: 36). While Dretske agrees that you cannot see another’s joy, anger or depression, he believes you can see (the fact) that another is happy, angry or depressed. The distinction here goes along with another that Dretske draws between what he calls “non-epistemic” and “epistemic seeing”. The former is a relation between a person and a thing (Dretske likens this relation to stepping on a bug), while the latter has “positive belief content” (Dretske 1966). He points out that just as one can see that someone is wealthy without seeing their wealth, or see that the metal rod is hot without seeing the heat, so one can see that another is happy, angry, depressed and the like without seeing the other’s joy, anger or depression (Dretske 1966 and 1973). Dretske suggests an analysis of epistemic seeing, which analysis contains an all-important reliability condition: the conditions under which, for example, Sally sees that Tom is angry must be such that Tom would not look angry to Sally unless he was angry. It is the satisfaction of this reliability condition that allows the satisfaction of the analysis to amount to both a visual and an epistemic  achievement.[6] Dretske appreciates that a given behavior on Tom’s part is not always a reliable indicator of, say, anger. What he holds is that under certain conditions and to those who know Tom well—such as his wife—his behavior can be taken to be a reliable indicator of his anger (for a critique of this idea see Avramides forthcoming). Therefore, according to Dretske, we can have direct perceptual knowledge of another’s mental states in the following sense: we can see that others are in pain, angry and the like, even though we cannot see another’s mental states or know that solipsism is  false.[7] The late 19th and early twentieth centuries saw the emergence of the phenomenological movement associated with such figures as Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty and Sartre. One important dimension of the work of these philosophers is discussion of intersubjectivity. There are two other philosophers in this tradition whose work is also strongly associated with intersubjectivity, Max Scheler and Edith Stein. It can be said of the phenomenological approach as a whole that it rejects the isolationism of the self that characterizes Cartesian philosophy. Scheler specifically criticizes the argument from analogy, claiming (i) that it is mistaken in its starting point or first premise and (ii) that it wrongly assumes that we cannot have access to another’s mind. The first premise of the argument from analogy is, in effect, the Cartesian starting point: one is secure in the knowledge that one has of one’s own conscious experience. These phenomenologists reject this starting point. In its place Husserl (1931) adopts the starting point of embodied subjectivity, Heidegger (1927) insists that the structure of human experience is such as to involve a relation to the world and to others (Dasein is essentially characterized by Mitsein), and Merleau-Ponty holds that “I find myself already situated and involved in a physical and social world” (1945 [2003: 419]). Sartre takes things further and draws attention to the extent to which the encounter with another is an encounter with someone who takes me as an object (1943). These philosophers refuse to allow themselves to be pre-occupied by the epistemological issues that they see as arising from a mistaken starting point. Instead of asking how I can justify my belief in the world and others, they take for granted that the individual’s experience is such as to exist in a world and for others and address questions that concern this starting point, such as: what makes this starting point possible (Husserl & Merleau-Ponty); how can we explain/understand the structures of the being of subjectivity in such a way as to include the world and others (Heidegger); how do I encounter the Other (Sartre). Crucial to the defense of this non-Cartesian starting point is a non-Cartesian conception of mind in relation to body. The conceptual divide between mind and body that one finds in Descartes’ philosophy is taken by these thinkers to be “inadequate to phenomenology” (Overgaard 2006). These phenomenologists also reject the idea that we cannot have access to the mind of another. Scheler points out that we believe ourselves to be directly acquainted with another person’s joy in his laughter, with his sorrow and pain in his tears, with his shame in his blushing and the like (1913 [1954: 260]). And in the same paragraph Scheler insists that we should not allow philosophical theory to tempt us away from the obvious: that we know the minds of others through perception. In a similarly vein, Merleau-Ponty (1945 [2003: 415]) writes: I perceive the grief or the anger of the other in his conduct, in his face or his hands, without recourse to any ‘inner’ experience of suffering or anger…. Scheler suggests that philosophical theory tries to turn us away from the obvious by insisting that “there is certainly no sensation of another person’s mind nor any stimulus from such a source”, and he insists that to think like this is to turn one’s back on the “expressive unity” of behavior (1913 [1954: 181]). He writes: “We can…have insight into others, in so far as we treat their bodies as a field of expression for their experiences” (1913 [1954: 10]). Whether we take knowledge here to come about either inference (as in the argument from analogy) or though perception turns, according to Scheler, on the question of how one views the relationship between mind and behavior. Scheler considers a crying child and the various responses that one may have to her. Firstly there is the possibility that one sees the face but does not see it as expressing distress. Secondly there is the possibility that one sees the face as expressive of distress while remaining indifferent. And finally, there is the situation where one sees the child’s distress and responds emotionally. Scheler associates empathy with the second situation, and labels the emotional response in the final situation  “sympathy.”[8]  The relationship between perception and empathy is explored in somewhat more detail in the work of both Husserl and his student Edith Stein. While Husserl struggles with the idea of empathy in relation to others throughout his career we find in Stein’s work a more settled view (Zahavi 2014). Stein distinguishes empathy from perception, holding that empathy “is a kind of act of perceiving sui generis” (Stein 1917 [1989: 5]): it is like perception in so far as it is direct (like Scheler, Stein rejects the idea that knowledge of others comes about through inference); it is unlike perception in the way in which it gives us its object. Empathy is the way in which we experience foreign consciousness. Stein follows Scheler in holding that our experience of the other is an experience of a soul which is “always necessarily a soul in a body” (1917 [1989: 44]), but she emphasizes the way in which this experience is always imperfect: there is always a distance between what I am aware of when I empathize with the other and what the other is experiencing; I experience the other as other, as a center of intentionality or as a perspective on the world that is different from mine (cf. Zahavi 2014: 192). Without the distance introduced by an imperfect understanding—if understanding here could be perfect—I would be the other (cf. Levinas 1979: 89: “the absence of the other is exactly his presence as other”). It is this distance that Stein accuses Scheler of failing to capture in his more straightforwardly perceptual  account.[9]  As well as appreciating the otherness of the other, there is an appreciation in the work of Stein and Scheler of the ethical nature of my encounter with the other (cf. Levinas and Wittgenstein). It is sometimes taken to be the case that perception and inference exhaust the alternatives when we consider how we might account for our knowledge of others. But, as we have seen in  §1.4.2,  Stein’s account eschews a straightforwardly perceptual account of our knowledge here without yet succumbing to an inferential one. It may be more fruitful if one thought of the opposition here to be between indirect and direct accounts of our knowledge of others. What many who oppose inference are against is the mind-body relationship upon which it is  based.[10] Those that advocate a direct account of our knowledge of other minds are faced with the following question: does their account entail a rejection of the asymmetry that philosophers have identified between knowledge of one’s own and another’s mind (see  §1)?  Some philosophers who propose a direct account would insist that they can still allow for an asymmetry here, just so long as we are careful how we understand  it.[11]  They believe that we must be careful not to understand the asymmetry here as committing us to a picture of mind as lying behind behavior. One alternative to this picture can be found in the work of Merleau-Ponty who writes, The grief and anger of another have never quite the same significance for him as they have for me. For him these situations are lived through, for me they are displayed. (Merleau-Ponty 1945 [2003: 415]) (Cf. Wittgenstein 1992: 10e, who writes: “My words and my actions interest me in a completely different way than they do someone else…I do not relate to them as an observer”.)