 In the twentieth century, research in the philosophy of mathematics revolved mostly around the nature of mathematical objects, the fundamental laws that govern them, and how we acquire mathematical knowledge about them. These are foundational concerns that are intimately connected with traditional metaphysical and epistemological questions. In the second half of the twentieth century, research in the philosophy of science to a significant extent moved away from foundational concerns. Instead, philosophical questions relating to the growth of scientific knowledge and of scientific understanding became more central. As early as the 1970s, there were voices that argued that a similar shift of attention should take place in the philosophy of mathematics (Lakatos 1976). For some decades, such sentiments remained restricted to a somewhat marginal school of thought in the philosophy of mathematics. However, in recent years the opposition between this new movement and mainstream philosophy of mathematics is softening. Philosophical questions relating to mathematical practice, the evolution of mathematical theories, and mathematical explanation and understanding have become more prominent, and have been related to more traditional questions from the philosophy of mathematics (Mancosu 2008). This trend will doubtlessly continue in the years to come. For an example, let us briefy return to the subject of computer proofs (see  section 5.3).  The source of the discomfort that mathematicians experience when confronted with computer proofs appears to be the following. A “good” mathematical proof should do more than to convince us that a certain statement is true. It should also explain why the statement in question holds. And this is done by referring to deep relations between deep mathematical concepts that often link different mathematical domains (Manders 1989). Until now, computer proofs typically only employ fairly low level mathematical concepts. They are notoriously weak at developing deep concepts on their own, and have difficulties with linking concepts in from different mathematical fields. All this leads us to a philosophical question which is just now beginning to receive the attention that it deserves: what is mathematical understanding?