 Reflection on the proposition role leads many propositionalists to rather dramatic answers to questions about the nature and status of propositions. Below is one standard line of argument, versions of which can be found in Bealer (1998) and Schiffer (2003). (See also Cartwright (1962) and Soames (1999).) The proposition that there are rocks, which we denote <there are rocks>, does not entail the existence of any beings that have or are capable of having mental states. It entails this neither in a strictly or broadly logical sense. That is, it is possible in the broadest sense for <there are rocks> to be true in the absence of all mental states. But now, if this proposition is possibly true in the absence of mental states, then it possibly exists in the absence of all mental states, and so is mind-independent. This is an easy argument for the mind-independence of at least some propositions. A parallel “easy argument” can be given for the abstractness of at least some propositions. <2+2=4> does not entail the existence of concrete entities. So it is possible for it to be true (and so to exist) in the absence of concrete entities. Thus, it is possibly abstract. Assuming, contra Linksy and Zalta (1996), that abstractness is, necessarily, an essential feature of abstract entities, then it follows that <2+2=4> is in fact abstract. One might want to extend such arguments to contingent propositions. Consider <there are trees>. This proposition is false in a world without concrete entities. But if it is false in such a world, it must exist in that world, and so is possibly, and so actually abstract. Similar arguments can be constructed for properties. If properties are what we assert of objects and what is true/false of objects, then there are simple arguments for the conclusion that at many properties are mind-independent and abstract. It is dangerous to generalize these sorts of “Easy Arguments” to all propositions (particularly singular propositions). But even if they cannot be fully generalized, they threaten to show that propositions would be mind-independent abstract entities. Now, given that propositions de jure are sharable objects of attitudes, it is antecedently unlikely that they should turn out to be, say, token utterances. But one might have thought that propositions could be identified with natural language sentence types (as in Quine 1960), or with sentence types in the language of thought. But if the Easy Arguments succeed, it seems that to accept propositions, we must accept Platonism. Conceptualism about propositions seems ruled out. Many philosophers deny that there are propositions precisely because they accept the validity of these Easy Arguments (and the truth of certain attitude ascriptions). There are familiar problems besetting the believer in abstract entities. The two “Benacerraf problems,” in particular have received much attention in the literature: the epistemological problem and identification problem. The epistemological problem for abstract propositions, roughly, is this: how can we know about abstract propositions, given that we cannot causally interact with them? The identification problem requires a bit more explanation. If propositions are abstract, then there will be many distinct candidates for propositions which seem to play the proposition role equally well. If certain entities, the Fs, are candidates for being propositions, why won’t the entities consisting of an F paired with the number 1 count as adequate candidates as well, so long as we reconstrue predicates for propositions in such a way as to make the number 1 irrelevant? But propositions cannot be both Fs and these new entities, because these new entities are not Fs. Is it simply indeterminate what propositions are? See the entry on  platonism: in metaphysics.  (See also J. Moore 1999) The Easy Arguments can appear suspicious. How can the seemingly obvious acknowledgement that there are propositions — i.e., that beliefs have sharable objects which bear truth-values — commit us to there being mind-independent abstract entities? We will discuss two sorts of reply found in the literature. Both are objections to the inference from there being propositions to the claim that propositions have the surprising features. We are putting aside objections to the claim that there are propositions. The Easy Arguments rely on an assumption about entailment and truth, namely: This assumption is needed to reason from premises about propositions failing to entail other propositions about there being mental states or being concrete entities to the possible truth of those propositions in the absence of mental states and concrete entities. But how could (A) fail?  If a proposition fails to entail that q, doesn’t it follow that there is a possible world in which the former is true and not-q? Some philosophers (Pollock 1985, King 2007) have argued that principles like (A) have two readings, one clearly acceptable but useless to the Easy Arguments and the other useful to those arguments but false.  The two readings correspond to two ways of understanding talk of truth with respect to possible worlds.  One way for something to be true with respect to a world requires the truth-bearer to exist in the world and be true there.  Another way is for the truth-bearer to “correctly describe” the world, where this does not require existing in the world.  Pollock gives the example of a picture depicting the non-existence of all pictures.  The picture could correctly depict a situation even though the situation it depicts is one in which the picture itself does not exist.  Similarly, the Medieval philosopher Jean Buridan discusses the example of an utterance of ‘there are no negative utterances’.  This utterance correctly describes a certain possible situation even though that situation is one in which the utterance would not exist. Following Adams (1981), we may call the former way of being true with respect to a world truth in a world and the latter truth at a world.  The conceptualist may claim that propositions can be true at worlds without being true in them, by analogy with the examples from Pollock and Buridan.  A proposition like <there are no propositions> is true at certain possible worlds but true in none.  Since we do not want to say that such propositions are necessary, we must understand necessity as truth at every possible world.  Correspondingly, to preserve the connections between entailment and necessity, we must understand entailment in terms of the entailed proposition being true at every world at which the entailing proposition is true.  Given all this, we can distinguish two readings for Assumption A: (Reading 1) If a proposition   fails to entail a proposition <q>, then there is a possible world W such that   is true in W and not-q at W. (Reading 2) If a proposition   fails to entail a proposition <q>, then there is a possible world W such that   is true at W and not-q at W. Given the understanding of entailment in terms of truth at a world, the conceptualist will claim that Reading 1 is false, while Reading 2 is true but useless to the Easy Arguments.  Thus, the conclusions of those arguments are blocked. The plausibility of this response depends on having a good account of what truth at a world amounts to.  But this, in turn, depends on issues in the metaphysics of modality. If worlds are concrete particulars (“I and all my surroundings”), as they are for David Lewis (1986), then we could say that a proposition is true at a world if the proposition is about the entities that are parts of that world and is true, and true in a world if true at a world and also part of that world.  There may well be difficulties of explaining how a proposition could be part of more than one concrete world (and why it would only be part of some concrete worlds but not all), but this framework seems to make conceptual room for the possibility propositions being true at worlds without being true in them. Suppose, however, that worlds were conceived as world stories, i.e., as maximal consistent sets of propositions (see Section 2). How, then, might truth at a world be understood?  One approach, favored by Adams (1981), is to explain truth at a world in terms of truth in a world, understanding the latter to amount to truth were the world actual (were all its members true).  On this approach, we would understand what is true at a world in terms of what is true in it, together with certain facts about the actual world.  However, the conceptualist cannot abide this approach.  For, on this approach, the members of any world are true in that world.  But since the members of any and every world are propositions, it would follow that, contrary to conceptualism, that it is necessary that there are propositions.  A more conceptualist-friendly approach is to reverse the order of explanation, to explain truth in a world in terms of truth at a world + existence in that world.  How could truth at a world be understood? A natural proposal is to understand it as membership in a world story. Difficulties emerge with this proposal when we face the question of how to understand consistency of world stories. There are maximal sets of propositions that are not possible worlds because they are not consistent in the relevant sense.  But the relevant sense is not easily defined. Following Adams (1981), we might wish to use the concept of possibility to gloss the notion of consistency: a set of propositions is consistent if and only if those propositions could all be true together.  This returns us to the problem noted in the previous paragraph: it again would turn out that necessarily there are propositions (even in mindless worlds). The conceptualist might hope to take the relevant notion of consistency as primitive and reject the gloss in terms of joint possible truth.  Still, we should ask about the broader implications of denying the joint possible truth of consistent world stories. Consider, for instance the notion of actuality.  Only one of the many possible worlds is actual, although each is actual relative to itself. The actual one, on the world story view, is the one all of whose members are true.  But if this is what actuality for worlds amounts to, then assuming possible worlds are possibly actual, it would follow that for each possible world all its members could be true together. Ought we to deny that possible worlds are possibly actual? The conceptualist might hope to avoid these problems, without falling back on Lewis’s concrete realism about possible worlds, by understanding worlds in terms of properties or states of affairs, rather than propositions.  Following Stalnaker (1976), one might think of worlds as properties which are ways things could have been. Following Plantinga (1974) and others, one might think of worlds as maximal consistent states of affairs, where these are thought of as distinct from propositions. However, this retrenchment may end up only shifting the Platonist worries elsewhere.  To distinguish the ways that are possible worlds (or possible world-states) from those which are not, it is difficult to avoid appealing to a gloss in terms of being possibly instantiated: the possible worlds are not only maximal but they could be instantiated. Taking this line would require conceding that in every world there are properties.  Something similar holds for the conception of possible worlds as maximal consistent states of affairs. One might think, however, that Platonism about properties is less problematic than Platonism about propositions.  The former do not represent the world, whereas the latter, as truth-bearers, do (Jubien 2001, King 2007).  However, properties can apply or fail to apply to objects, and can be said to be true or false of objects, and so it is not clear that worries about representation clearly gain more traction for propositions than for properties.  Similar considerations apply to states of affairs. Despite these worries, the conceptualist might be encouraged by the example of singular propositions.  Hasn’t the truth in vs. truth at distinction been useful in dealing with the modality of singular propositions?  For example, consider any singular proposition about Socrates, e.g., the proposition that Socrates was a philosopher. Such propositions, plausibly, depend for their existence on the object they are directly about.  One might therefore think that no singular proposition about Socrates could exist unless Socrates existed. Consider, then, the proposition that Socrates does not exist.  It is clearly contingent that Socrates exists; things could have been otherwise.  But then the proposition that Socrates does not exist would appear to be possible without being possibly true.  Unlike the examples from Pollock and Buridan, however, we cannot understand such possibility without possible truth in terms of expressing a possibly true proposition while not being possibly true itself.  Propositions do not express propositions, of course, and so we cannot understand their possibility without possible truth in this way (Plantinga 1981). What is it, then, for such a singular proposition to be possible but not possibly true?  Answering this question was one of the key motivations in the development of the distinction between truth in and truth at a world.  But while Adams and others attempted to do this by thinking of truth at a world as determined by what is true in that world together with a certain set of facts about the actual world, the conceptualist hopes to kick aside the ladder of truth in a world altogether.  Whether this hope is reasonable or not is an important issue in contemporary work on propositions. (Key recent discussions include King 2007, Soames 2010, and Merricks 2015). Another response to the Easy Arguments is, so to speak, to deflate their significance by deflating propositions. The Easy Arguments succeed, but their success marks no great philosophical discovery and raises no hard questions of the sort that have traditionally bothered metaphysicians of a nominalist bent. We will here discuss only Stephen Schiffer’s (2003) theory of “pleonastic  propositions.”[8] Propositions exist, for Schiffer, but unlike rocks or cats, there is nothing more to them than what our concept of a proposition guarantees. One may call them “abstract entities,” if one likes, but this label should not encourage the thought that our minds can reach beyond the physical world to make contact with denizens of a Platonic universe. We know about propositions, not by interacting with them, as we do with rocks and cats, but by being participants in certain sorts of linguistic or conceptual practice. It’s because we speak or think in certain ways that we are able to know about propositions. Schiffer argues, in effect, that given our proposition-talk and thought, propositions are, in D. M. Armstrong’s phrase, a kind of “ontological free lunch.” That is, the key “axioms” of our proposition-talk and thought are guaranteed to be true. These include the instances of the equivalence schema (E) for propositions: The proposition that p is true iff p. Given the truth of such axioms, it follows that propositions exist and have the features attributed to them by our axioms. Moreover, because these axioms are constitutive of the concept of a proposition, it follows that, by possessing that concept, we can know the truth of these axioms. One might concede to Schiffer that the axioms are constitutive of our concept of a proposition. But why think those axioms are true? Schiffer stresses that we do not make the axioms true by saying, thinking, or “stipulating” that they are true. The mind-independence of propositions, after all, is implicit in those axioms. Schiffer’s argument for pleonastic propositions is of a piece with his argument for pleonastic entities generally, including fictional entities, events, and properties. A pleonastic entity, for him, is an entity that falls under a pleonastic concept. The latter is the key notion and is defined as follows. A SFN (something-from-nothing) transformation (about Fs) is a statement that allows us to deduce a statement about a kind of entity F, from a statement that involves no reference to Fs. (61) SFN transformations assert a kind of supervenience condition on Fs: if the relevant non-F conditions obtain, Fs exist and have the relevant features. (E.g., if snow is white, then the proposition that snow is white exists and is true.) If the concept F is pleonastic, then there are Fs. We need to know how to tell if a concept is pleonastic. Here is Schiffer’s test: Schiffer’s final formulation of the conservativeness test is: One might think the conservativeness test is overly complicated, and that all that matters is that the new entities not interfere with the empirical world. If so, then the test would mention only empirical theories not all theories. But, as Matti Eklund (2007) points out, two kinds of entity that are individually non-interfering with respect to the empirical world might interfere with one another. Schiffer is aware of this problem (see his discussion of anti-fictional entities, pp. 55–6), and this is why he turns to the more complicated account. Schiffer’s picture is this. If a concept satisfies the conservativeness test, then its instantiation would be unproblematic because it would interfere with nothing else. Its instantiation comes for free. If a concept doesn’t meet this test, it doesn’t come for free. Although Schiffer’s view of propositions can be described as deflationary in one sense (because it attempts to deflate questions about the existence and nature of propositions), the meta-ontology underlying Schiffer’s approach is, if anything, inflationary: all “non-interfering” kinds of entity are instantiated. Schiffer’s, and other deflationist theories, must, at a minimum, answer the following two questions, in addition to the questions facing all propositionalists: Even if Fs would be non-interfering in Schiffer’s sense, the postulation of Fs logically conflicts with some consistent theories, e.g., ‘There are no Fs’. Schiffer places severer constraints on the denial of entities than on the acceptance of them.  Suppose Fs would be non-interfering. Then adding them would not add information about non-Fs. But suppose also that denying Fs would not add information about non-Fs. Why isn’t this a reason to deny Fs?  So, in this sense, the theory denying Fs passes a corresponding conservativeness test. If the proposition that snow is white is a simple, necessary and eternal object, why does its having a property (truth) have anything to do with concrete snow’s having a property (whiteness)? Do instances of the T-schema simply state brute necessary connections between abstract objects and concrete ones?  Or do these necessary connections somehow derive from our practices, and if so, how? Another reaction one might have to the Easy Arguments is to accept their conclusions but to give an account of the nature of propositions which will make these conclusions palatable.  One promising line of thinking, in this regard, is to think of propositions as types, the tokens of which are mental or linguistic acts or events, and in particular the acts that would be thought to express the proposition.  Such views have been developed in recent years by Dummett (1996), Hanks (2011, 2015), and Soames (2010, 2014a, 2015).  We focus here on the recent proposals put forth by Hanks and Soames. The type view is motivated by its answers to otherwise puzzling features of traditional Platonist views of propositions (e.g. Frege (1984)).  On this view, belief and other attitudes are understood as relations to already-existing propositions which represent things as being a certain way.  The truth or falsity of an individual’s belief or other cognitive state is explained by the truth or falsity of the proposition which is the object of that state.  If truth consists in a representation’s being accurate, then a proposition is true just in case it accurately represents things as being a certain way.  Thus, on the traditional view, thinking subjects represent things as being a certain way (either in thought or language) by standing in appropriate relations to propositions which fundamentally represent things as being a certain way. Two problems arise for the Platonist’s position.  First, how do cognizers come to be acquainted with such propositions?  Second, what explains how propositions represent things as being a certain way?  Platonists appear to have no answer to the epistemic question, and presumably accept representation as a primitive feature of propositions.  Type theorists, however, explain the relation between a cognizer and a proposition simply as an instance of the general relation between type and token.  Consider, as Dummett (1996, p. 259) does, one’s humming of a tune.  The tune is a species or type of musical performance capable of having multiple performances at differing times or locations, while the humming of it is a token act belonging to that type.  One might then see the relation of a proposition to a mental or linguistic act as one between the type of act performed and the performance of the act. What type of acts should one identify with propositions?  For both Hanks and Soames, propositions are types of predicative acts.  The notion of predication here is simply, for atomic propositions, one of an agent’s representing an object o as having property F.  (Hanks (2015, p. 64) characterizes predication as categorization, or the sorting of things into groups according to a rule.  We will take this to be a form of representation.)  Since representation is primarily something done by cognitive agents, according to Hanks and Soames, one might wonder whether the proposition itself is representational, and so possesses truth-conditions, on the type view.  Both theorists respond to this concern by claiming that propositions are representational in a secondary, derivative sense.  There are many examples of types that inherit features of their tokens (a sonata (type) can be discordant in virtue of performances of it being discordant; a movie can be frightening in virtue of its tokens being so, etc.  See the entry on types and tokens.)  Just as an act can be described as intelligent in order to communicate that the agent  acted intelligently in performing the act, type theorists will claim that a proposition represents o as F in a similarly derivative sense wherein any agent who performs the act of predicating F of o will thereby represent o as F.  One question that arises for such a view is whether propositions are genuinely representational entities with truth-conditions, or whether the claim that a proposition represents things as being a certain way is simply a convenient manner of speaking indirectly about the actual and possible representational acts of thinkers. As we have seen, the type view reverses the traditional order of explanation concerning the nature of predication, representation, and truth-conditions.  On the traditional, Fregean picture, propositions exist as objective, mind-independent entities “waiting” to be entertained, judged or asserted, so to speak.  On this view, for a subject S to predicate F of o is for S to entertain the proposition that o is F; for S to represent o as F in thought or language is to have have a thought or utterance with the primarily representational proposition that o is F as its content, etc.  On the type view, a proposition’s representational and predicative properties are derived from the fundamentally representational and predicative acts of agents. A concern for the type view is whether there will be “missing propositions” — truths or falsehoods which have never been entertained.  One drawn to the type view may allow for the existence of uninstantiated types to account for the existence of these propositions.  However, given that propositions are claimed to derive their representational features from their tokens, such uninstantiated types would lack representational features, and so lack truth-conditions.  Hanks suggests dealing with such propositions counterfactually.  Even if no one had ever predicated eloquence of Clinton, the proposition that Clinton is eloquent is true iff Clinton is eloquent because if someone were to predicate eloquence of Clinton, the token would be true iff Clinton is eloquent.  Predicative types, then, inherit their representation features from both their actual and possible tokens.  This response, however, leaves us with the question of truths for which there are not even any merely possible tokens — for example, mathematical truths that are too complicated for any finite mind to grasp.  What, if anything, provides the truth-conditions of these propositions? Hanks (2015, p. 27) allows that propositions are mind-independent and objective entities which do not depend for their existence on having any tokens, just as one might think about a difficult type of dive that has never been performed.  Thus, while Hanks’ view appears to be a rejection of a traditional Platonism about propositions, it seems nevertheless to accept a Platonism about types by untethering their existence from their tokens.  (Compare to Dodd’s (2007) defense of Platonism about types.)  Soames (2014a,b) also allows for untokened types, but only those whose constituents have been referred to or predicated in other propositions.  For Soames, a proposition p may exist in w even if no token of p has been performed in w.  For Soames, if in w a predicative event has occurred in which an agent predicates n-place property R of n objects, and in w events of referring to or thinking of objects o1...on have occurred, then the proposition that is the type of act of predicating R of o1...on exists (even if R has never been predicated of o1...on in w).  Still, it would seem that there can be truths in a world about objects that have never been thought of or referred to in that world.  In response to this, Soames claims that a proposition need not exist in a world w in order to be true in w.  In support of this, Soames appeals to other, albeit controversial, cases in which an object can have a property despite not existing.  For instance, Socrates can have the properties of being referred to or being admired despite no longer existing.  Thus, Soames’ accommodation of our intuitions concerning propositions that have never been thought appears to involve a rejection of Actualism. The type view has been argued to provide solutions to several traditional problems for propositional thought, including Frege’s puzzle, first-person belief, Kripke’s puzzle about belief, and the problem of empty names.  In responding to these problems, Soames invokes “Millian modes of presentation,” or ways of cognizing an object in thought which do not affect the representational content of the act,  to preserve a non-Fregean, Millian view of semantic content for names and natural kind terms while individuating propositions finely enough to solve traditional problems in the philosophy of language.  Hanks, by contrast, invokes distinct types of referential and expressive acts as the constituents of propositions.  On this view, each use of a name falls under several different reference types which differ in their fineness of grain, each associated with a different proposition. As we have seen, the type view is motivated in large part by the perceived need to explain how propositions represent things as being a certain way on the grounds that a view which accepts primitively representational propositions is objectionably mysterious.  Some question, however, whether the representational properties of propositions can (or need to) be explained at all (McGlone 2012, Caplan, et al. 2013, Merricks 2015). Merricks, for example, argues that we should accept that there are fundamentally representational entities, but that we have no reason to favor mental states (such as beliefs) over propositions as being the fundamental bearers of representational properties.  For if, e.g., beliefs are fundamentally representational, then it is either a primitive fact about them that they represent what they do, or it is a feature capable of explanation.  If it is a primitive fact about them, then the view appears just as mysterious as one which accepts that propositions are primitively representational.  If it is a fact capable of explanation, as the type theorists contend, then it is presumably explained in terms of an agent’s ability to predicate properties of objects.  But unless there is some explanation of how an agent can engage in predication, predication must itself be a primitive representational ability, and the theory has not made any genuine progress on what was to be explained. A final question worth considering at this stage is whether propositions are representational entities at all.  Richard (2013) and Speaks (2014), for instance, each develop views of propositions which deny that they are.  Consider the view defended by Richard.  Sentences, beliefs, and the like represent things as being a certain way — snow as being white, for example.  Put another way, the sentence ‘Snow is white’ represents snow’s being white, where this is simply a way for things to be — a state of affairs or property that is either instantiated or not (but does not represent things as being any way, just as properties are not in general representational).  On this approach, the proposition expressed by the sentence is identified with the way that things are represented as being, not as something which has representational properties either primitively or in need of explanation by more fundamental acts of predication.  If an approach along these lines is correct, the type view appears to lose one of its central motivations.