 Naive Russellianism faces several problems. In this section we shall offer a quick overview of some of the main problems and gesture towards possible solutions. Pragmatic principles. If the Naive Russellian wishes to give a pragmatic account of people’s ordinary judgments about the differing truth-values of (1) and (4), she must clearly identify the pragmatic principles that make these incorrect judgments so pervasive. (Note: This problem will not face Braun’s version of Naive Russellianism in quite the same way.) H.P. Grice, the father of pragmatic implicatures, offered a very compelling theory of conversational implicatures. (See Grice 1975, 1978, 1981. See also the entry on  implicature.)  But it is unlikely to help the Naive Russellian. Information about the way the believer believes what she believes cannot, it would seem, be carried as a conversational implicature because such information is not calculable by the conversational participants from what is said and the maxims, as Grice’s theory requires conversational implicatures to be. After all, that would require that, at some level, ordinary speakers realize that they are not saying all they mean when they utter, under “ordinary circumstances,” a sentence like (1). But that is implausible. (Schiffer, in his 1987, levels a similar charge, although he does not explicitly present it in terms of Grice’s calculability condition; Salmon responds in his 1989. See also Recanati 1993, chapter 17.) Obvious permutations on Grice’s notion of conversational implicature, like Morgan’s and Horn & Bayer’s notion of short-circuited conversational implicatures, won’t be of much use either. (See Morgan 1978 and Horn & Bayer 1984.) Short-circuiting occurs when a nonliteral use becomes standardized. For example, it is at least arguable that uses of ‘Can you pass the salt?’, to take an example from Searle 1975, are standardly requests for salt. According to Morgan and Horn and Bayer, this meant information is a conversational implicature. Ordinary speakers may not recognize, even upon reflection, that they are speaking nonliterally because that nonliteral use has become conventionalized through repetition. And even though ‘Do you have the ability to pass the salt?’ and ‘Can you pass the salt?’ (at least arguably) mean the same thing and hence utterances of them have the same conversational implicating potential, because of past uses an utterance of the latter but not the former will naturally give rise to the request for the salt. Short-circuiting is unlikely to be of use to a Naive Russellian because it requires past uses that meet the conditions for ordinary conversational implicature, those uses of which then become, through repetition, standardized. Those past uses, however, must pass the calculability condition, as they were ordinary conversational implicatures. But it is doubtful that there were at any time widespread uses of propositional attitude reporting sentences that met the necessary conditions for being conversational implicatures, as it is highly dubious that ordinary speakers ever realized that sentences like (1) and (4) say the same thing. Hence, there was never the necessary past use as a standard conversational implicature that could have become standardized. We have argued that a proponent of (the standard version of) Naive Russellianism cannot employ Grice’s notion of conversational implicature, or any obvious permutation thereof, to account for our Frege intuitions. What the Naive Russellian needs is a notion of a pragmatic implicature that does not rely upon calculability and does not require the propositions semantically encoded by the relevant utterances to play a role in the conscious psychological lives of the participants of the conversation. How could an implicature be generated under such conditions? The following is a suggestion. There is a widespread conflation of belief contents and belief states. Because ordinary folk do not clearly distinguish these two notions, it possible for them to use propositional attitude verbs that express a relation to belief contents intending also to impart information about the belief states of the subject of the report without realizing that they are speaking nonliterally. As information concerning belief states is useful in explaining, predicting, and rationalizing actions – something propositional attitude reporting sentences seem made to do – and belief contents and belief states are not clearly distinguished, ordinary speakers unwittingly come to use such sentences to convey more than they express. Asymmetric relations. If names are inter-substitutable, and if (12) is true then (13) and (14) must also be true. Can it really be that (13) and (14) are true and that the typical strong feeling that they are false is really just a matter of pragmatic inappropriateness? The Naive Russellian seems to have little choice but to offer a positive answer. If (13) is true, then is it also true that Lois believes that Superman is stronger than himself, or can we differentiate this from the previous claims? Maybe we can get ourselves to accept that Lois rationally believes that Superman is stronger than Superman. But how could a thoughtful agent believe that something is stronger than itself? Surely that is a violation of the requirements of rationality. Regarding this last problem, Salmon 1992 and McKay 1991 compellingly argue that believing that Superman is stronger than Superman is distinct from believing that Superman is stronger than himself because the proposition that Superman is stronger than Superman is different from the proposition that Superman is stronger than himself, on the grounds that being stronger than Superman is a different property from being stronger than oneself. The first is a two-place relation, with the identity pair <SUPERMAN, SUPERMAN> as relata; the second is a one-place, self-reflexive property. (For more on the difference between xRy and xRx, under an assignment of the same object to both variables x and y, see Fine 2007 Psychological explanation, predication, and rationalization. The explanatory, predictive, and rationalizing potential of (1) differs from that of (4). For example, an utterance of (4), if accepted as true, would typically lead one to expect that, when Lois is looking for some heavy boxes to be moved in her office, sees Clark Kent (dressed in his Daily Planet garb) standing by doing nothing, she would ask him to help, etc.. This, of course, is the wrong result. Lois does no such thing. The Naive Russellian thinks that an utterance of (4) is true in exactly those conditions under which an utterance of (1) is true. But this, it may be thought, is hard to square with the fact that they have such very different explanatory, predictive, and rationalizing potential. (See Richard 1997 for a powerful presentation of this objection.) The force of this objection rests on the first problem of pragmatic principles raised above. For if that problem is solved, then the solution to the problems of psychological explanation, predication, and rationalization will follow on its wings. Insofar as utterances of (1) and (4) implicate different information about the way in which Lois believes what she allegedly believes, it seems likely that there will be a very natural account of the difference in their explanatory, predictive, and rationalizing potential, the difference in what is pragmatically implicated will account for the differences noted in this section. So the more fundamental problem facing the Naive Russellian is the problem of pragmatic principles. Schiffer’s iteration problem. In his 1987, 2006, Schiffer argues that Naive Russellianism is implausible when it comes to beliefs about other people’s beliefs. Lois, the Naive Russellian claims, is rational in believing a contradiction because she has two modes of presentation of Superman such that she does not believe that they are modes of presentation of the same object. So, Lois can rationally believe the singular propositions that Superman is strong and that Superman is not strong at the same time because she believes the first in one way and the second in another way. But most of us believe that Lois believes that Superman is strong while believing that Lois does not believe that Clark Kent is strong. So, given Naive Russellianism, most of us then believe a proposition and its negation and we seem to not be guilty of irrationality for so doing. But, argues Schiffer, the Naive Russellian cannot account for this, as most of us do not have two distinct ways of thinking of Superman (or Lois, for that matter) such that we do not realize that they are ways of thinking of the same individual, as most of us are not ignorant of the identity between Superman and Clark Kent. So, it seems that the Naive Russellian’s conditions for rationally believing a proposition and its negation are not met. (Salmon 1989, 2006 contains responses to Schiffer’s objection. See also Braun 2006.)