 Powerful considerations developed by  Gottlob Frege  in his 1892 suggest that words within the scope of a propositional attitude verb cannot function as they do outside those linguistic environments. Frege presents his puzzle as one about the relationship between the cognitive value of expressions and their ordinary reference, arguing that the two must be distinct. Frege’s puzzle can be posed as a question about propositional attitude attributions. (We will use the verb ‘believe’ in the discussion of these puzzles. Similar puzzles arise with other propositional attitude verbs.) Consider, for example, Lois Lane before her discovery of Superman’s “true identity,” pretending that the Superman stories as actual fact. Lois is familiar with Clark Kent, her fellow employee, and Superman, the hero she most admires, but she does not recognize that the person she calls ‘Clark Kent’ is identical with the person she calls ‘Superman’. (This doesn’t really do justice to what Lois fails to realize and there are problems specifying what Lois is ignorant of. See the supplementary document: In the text we’ll simply skip over these complications.) So, we would ordinarily accept the following sentences as true. (1) Lois believes that Superman is strong. (2) Lois believes that Clark Kent is not strong. (3) Lois does not believe that Clark Kent is strong. When we compare (1) with (2) and (3), it seems apparent that the names ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ make different semantic contributions to the sentences in which they occur. In particular, it appears that replacing ‘Superman’ in (1) with the co-referring ‘Clark Kent’ changes the true (1) to the false (4). Since ‘Clark Kent’ and ‘Superman’ have the same reference, it seems that something other than the reference of the names must be relevant to the semantic evaluation of the belief attribution. Without propositional attitude attributions, one might hope for a simpler semantics, in which only the referent of a name is relevant to the evaluation of sentences that contain it. For consider the following pair of sentences. (6) Clark Kent is strong. (5) is true iff (6) is true. Indeed, it is plausible to insist further that the two sentences have the same modal profile. Even if Lois and others do not realize it, these sentences, given their meanings, must have the same truth-value. Each involves a reference to the same individual and each predicates the same property of that individual. However, if we expect an adequate semantics to account for the difference in cognitive value of (5) and (6) (Lois accepts (5) but not (6)), we must recognize a semantic difference in the contribution of the two names. We can get to the same conclusion by a different route. The trip, although somewhat lengthy, is worth taking. Lois is disposed to sincerely, reflectively, and competently accept (5) while denying (6). Lois is, presumably, also disposed to accept the following sentence. It is plausible to link an agent’s sincere, reflective, and competent acceptance of a sentence with what she believes. The Disquotation principle, so-called by Saul Kripke in his 1979, does just that. (Our formulation of the principle differs from Kripke’s in providing missing time and context indices.) (Why relativize to context and time? Suppose an agent accepts ‘I am hungry’ at t. It should not follow from this that she believes what is expressed by ‘I am hungry’ as uttered by you – unless you happen to be the agent in question. It also shouldn’t follow that she always persists in believing what she believes; she is free to change her mind on the matter.) Given Disquotation, Lois’s acceptance of (5) and (7) entails that (1) and (2) are true. Now, as deplorable as Lois’s cognitive state is, it seems wrong to convict her of irrationality; she does not seem to believe a contradiction “in the sense in which thoughtful people do not.” (The phrase comes from Perry 1977.) But then it would seem that ‘Clark Kent’ must not be substitutable for ‘Superman’ in (1), else she would. If the substitution of ‘Clark Kent’ for ‘Superman’ in (1) did preserve truth, as it does in (5), then the truth of (1) (and the fact that ‘Clark Kent’ and ‘Superman’ are co-designating) would entail (4). But if both (2) and (4) are true, then, it would appear, Lois believes a proposition and its negation and would thus be guilty of irrationality. As she is intuitively not irrational, ‘Superman’ in (1) is not substitutable salva veritate for ‘Clark Kent’. If it seems reasonable to infer agents’s beliefs from their acceptance patterns, thus leading us to Disquotation, it may seem equally plausible to infer what agents do not believe from what they withhold acceptance from, leading us to Converse Disquotation below. Converse Disquotation and the fact that Lois denies (6) entail that (3) is true. But if both (1) and (3) are true, then, it would seem, we should not allow substitution of co-designating singular terms within the scope of propositional attitude verb, or the threat of contradiction we saw above will be brought home to us, the ascriber. For substitution of ‘Clark Kent’ for ‘Superman’ in (1) would commit us to (4), which contradicts (3). Using Disquotation and Converse Disquotation (together with intuitively plausible acceptance patterns on the part of Lois, considerations of Lois’s rationality, and intuitive considerations of what rationality consists in) commit us to the truth of (1)-(3) and the falsity of (4), and thus, it would seem, to a denial of a substitution principle for co-designating singular terms within the scope of propositional attitude verbs. If both (1) and (3) are true, then, one would think, (1) and (4) must say different things. This in turn seems to commit us to the claim that ‘Clark Kent’ and ‘Superman’ have different semantically relevant values as they occur in (1) and (2). (In distinguishing these two arguments we follow Kripke 1979. Kripke does not endorse the conclusion of these arguments. Instead, Kripke argues that the so-called Millian thesis is not to blame for Frege puzzles but an inadequacy in our very practice of reporting propositional attitudes. We discuss Kripke further below in section 9.) In summary, Frege calls our attention to two problems, (i) the problem of the apparent difference in truth-value of corresponding belief attributions (such as (1) and (4)), and (ii) the problem of the difference in the cognitive significance of sentences composed in the same way of elements with the same reference (such as (5) and (6)). If distinct belief attributions indicate differences in cognitive value of the sentences in their that-clauses, then these two problems are really a single problem, presumably with a single solution. [For further discussion of these problems, see the subsection on  Frege’s Puzzles  in the entry on  Gottlob Frege.]