 Some philosophers, notably W.V.O. Quine, recognize the existence of certain sorts of abstract entities but not others at least partly on the basis of concerns about identity conditions.  Quine granted the existence of sets, in part because they obey the extensionality axiom: sets are identical iff they have the same members.  When it came to properties, relations and propositions, however, he found no such clear criterion of identity.  The property of being a creature with a heart, he noted, is distinct from the property of being a creature with a kidney, even if all the same things exemplify the two properties. It is a controversial matter whether Quine was right to demand such rigorous criteria of identity as a condition for acceptance of a class of entities.  However, even if Quine asks too much, any good theory of propositions ought to have something to say about when propositions are identical and when they are distinct.  Developing theories which give such accounts in a way that fits well with intuitive data concerning propositional attitude ascriptions would enhance our reasons to accept propositions. The question of identity conditions for propositions is importantly related to the question of whether propositions are structured entities. Propositions are structured if they have constituents, in some broad sense, and the order of the constituents matters. Order matters only if there could be two structured propositions sharing all the same constituents, but which are distinct due to differences in the way under which those constituents are “united” in the proposition. E.g., if the proposition that a loves b is the ordered triple <loving, a, b>, it is distinct from the proposition that b loves a, which would be the ordered triple <loving, b, a>. If propositions are structured entities, then sameness of constituents and sameness of order will entail identity. There are, of course, dangers, in regarding propositions as structured. Prima facie, one would rather not claim that the proposition that x is triangular is identical to the proposition that x is trilateral, since a subject might believe one but not the other. It will be important, then, not to individuate propositions too coarsely. However, one might worry, in the opposing direction, about overly fine individuations of propositions.  Is the proposition that John loves Mary different from the proposition that Mary is loved by John?  For more on structured propositions, see the entry on  structured propositions.[9] Any theory that construes propositions as structured entities would seem to face the problem of the unity of the proposition.  It is not entirely straightforward to say what this problem or set of problems is.  But at the very least, there are at least two problems here.  There is the problem of explaining why one sort of structured whole, a proposition, can be true or false, while the set of its constituents is not.  A list isn’t true or false, and a proposition with the same constituents is; why is this?  Second, there is a general problem of explaining how two distinct things could have all the same constituents.  For a thorough discussion of the history of philosophical work on the unity of the sentence and the proposition, the reader should consult Gaskin (2008). Some hold that propositions lack constituents altogether, and so are unstructured.  If propositions are unstructured, then if they are sets, they inherit the identity conditions for sets: sameness of members. Thus, if a proposition is the set of worlds in which it is true (as in Stalnaker 1976), then P=Q iff P and Q have the same worlds as members iff P and Q are true in the same worlds. As is well-known, this theory leads to a very coarse individuation of propositions, too coarse, arguably, to handle propositional attitudes. (See Soames (1987) for a discussion of this theory as well as the theory of propositions as sets of concrete situations or facts. If propositions are unstructured and distinct from sets, there are several possibilities for explaining their identity conditions. First, identity conditions might be specified in terms of possible attitudes. One possibility is this: P=Q if, necessarily whoever believes (asserts, denies, etc.) P believes (asserts, denies, etc.) Q, and vice versa.  Second, proposition identity might be reduced to property identity in the manner of Myhill (1963) and Zalta (1983).  Thus, Zalta (1983, 72) offers the following definition of proposition identity:  =<q> if and only if the property of being such that p is identical to the property of being such that q.  A third proposal, not incompatible with the second, is to explain proposition identity in terms of the “free generation” of propositions from a stock of certain non-propositional entities, e.g., individuals, properties and relations, by algebraic operations (Bealer 1982, Menzel 1986, Zalta 1983 and   1989).[10]  Although propositions on this approach are unstructured, each proposition may be represented by its “construction sequence.” To avoid identifying <Hesperus is beautiful> with <Phosphorus is beautiful>, the relevant inputs cannot simply be Hesperus (Phosphorus) and the property of being beautiful. A well-known strategy to cope with this problem, due to Frege, is to appeal to different modes of presentation associated with the different names, each contributing something different to the proposition expressed.  However, these modes need not be understood as complex properties uniquely exemplified by referent of the name. For instance, Bealer (1998) invokes what he calls “non-Platonic” modes of presentation.  Whether these non-Platonic modes of presentation are understood as words, as causal chains of word use, or in some other way, the important point is that the mode associated with ‘Hesperus’ will be different than that associated with ‘Phosphorus’. Zalta (1989) introduces propositions with abstract constituents to do the work of these modes. On Zalta’s view, such singular propositions are built out of abstract individuals that encode the cognitive content of names. Since these abstract individuals encode this cognitive content, there is no need for the referent of the name to instantiate it, and a fortiori no need for the content to be a property uniquely instantiated by this referent.  For more on encoding vs. instantiating, see section 6 of the entry on existence.  Thus, these theorists hope to use the metaphysical tools of these algebraic accounts to accommodate some of the key Fregean intuitions about differences in propositions expressed while avoiding difficulties with the Fregean doctrine of sense. For a recent criticism of the notion of propositional constituency, see Keller (2013); for a positive account of propositional constituency, see Gilmore (2014).