 Frege’s solution to Frege’s puzzle has been criticized on several fronts. Some accuse it for violating semantic innocence. (Davidson 1968 is the locus classicus of this complaint; Barwise and Perry 1983 develop the charge.) Proponents of semantic innocence see an expression as having the same reference in a wide body of linguistic environments. In particular, ‘Superman’ is seen as having the same reference in (1) as it does in (5). Sometimes semantic innocence is just taken as a raw datum. But one might also substantiate the claim by considering anaphora across attitude verbs. (For more, see the entry on  anaphora.)  Consider the following. There is a reading of (8) where ‘she’, as it occurs in (8), is anaphoric on ‘Jill’; that is, ‘she’ is anchored to ‘Jill’, in the sense that the reference of the former is inherited from the reference of the later. ‘Jill’, as it occurs in (8), is outside the scope of a propositional attitude verb and hence has its customary reference. So, then, it would seem, ‘she’ must also have the customary reference of ‘Jill’ and hence must refer to an individual and not a sense. This runs contrary to Frege’s reference-shift claim. More generally, Frege’s theory seems to have trouble accounting for the truth of sentences like (8), as ‘she’ (for example) seems to simply pick out Jill herself independently of any mode of presentation. (Sentence (8) tells us nothing about how Jack represents Jill.) Soames 1989 presents a similar argument against the Fregean solution, although he does not use it to argue for semantic innocence directly. The point is related to the more general worry that Fregean accounts cannot offer an adequate account of de re belief. (See the supplementary document on for further discussion.) The Fregean should not be terribly perturbed by these observations. First, even if we find semantic innocence a virtue, the key insights behind Frege’s solution can be applied without invoking reference-shifting. And it is reference-shifting, not the sense/reference distinction itself, that innocence forbids. Frege’s key insights are that singular terms have both a sense and a reference, that co-referring singular terms can have different senses, and that propositional attitude verbs are sensitive to the (customary) senses of the expressions embedded in their scope and not merely their (customary) referents. Frege pulled off the last insight by claiming that propositional attitude verbs induce a reference-shift. But there are other ways to get the same result. One might, for example, claim that ‘believes’ functions somewhat like ‘so-called’ in (9) below. (The example is from Quine 1953.) ‘Giorgione’, as it occurs in (9), simply refers to the man Giorgione. But substitution is illegitimate because ‘so-called’ refers to the expression preceding it and not merely the referent of that expression. So, substitution fails but not because the substitution affects the reference of the terms. Rather, substituting ‘Giorgione’ with the co-referring ‘Barbarelli’ in (9) affects the reference of ‘so’ in ‘so-called’. (This differs from Quine’s own explanation of why substitution fails in (9).) Similarly, a neo-Fregean might claim that expressions have their customary references and senses whether inside or outside the scope of a propositional attitude verb, thus ensuring semantic innocence, but insist that propositional attitude verbs themselves are in some way sensitive to the senses of the expressions within their scope and not merely their references. Then substitution of co-referring singular terms within the scope of an attitude verb is blocked, as such substitution affects the semantic value of the attitude verb itself, but innocence is preserved. (See Forbes 1989, 1990, 1993 for development of a similar idea. Pietroski 1996 argues for a Fregean account that respects innocence as well, although his account, unlike Forbes’s, is developed in the Davidsonian framework.) So, a Fregean can accept semantic innocence. Furthermore, it is far from clear that semantic innocence must be accepted. We cannot directly intuit that an occurrence of a proper name in the scope of an attitude verb has the same reference as an occurrence of that name outside the scope of that attitude verb. That is too theoretical a claim to be within the domain of intuition. It must be supported by argument and we can question whether the phenomena of cross-attitudinal anaphora support semantic innocence. In his 1969, Kaplan taught us how we can be Fregeans and allow quantifying into attitude verbs. (See the supplementary document on the de re/de dicto distinction, op cit., for the details.) The key idea was to introduce a relation between an individual-concept and the object it determines; Kaplan, following Church 1951, called this D, which is a “denotation predicate.” The same technique can be used to account for the anaphoric dependence of a pronoun inside the scope of an attitude verb on a singular term outside the scope of that verb. A sentence like (8) would then be read as something like: “Jack and Jill went up the hill and (there is an individual-concept c that ”designates“ Jill such that) Jack stands in the belief relation to the proposition consisting of c and the semantic value of ‘went up first’.” There may well be problems with this account. But its mere presence shows two things. First, one needs an argument for the claim that a proper treatment of cross-attitudinal anaphoric relations is possible only if semantic innocence is accepted. And that argument will have to show what is wrong with a view like the one suggested by Kaplan, as that view promises to show how a reference-shifting view can accommodate the phenomena. Second, and relatedly, one cannot refute the Fregean claim that proper names have both a sense and a reference and that propositional attitude ascriptions are sensitive to sense and not just reference simply by producing sentences like (8). The simple Fregean solution, however, faces other, more serious, problems. First, the account seems to fail when we try to extend it to other types of attitude reporting sentences than the classical examples we have considered above. One of our most common ways of referring to individuals is to use indexicals and demonstratives, such as ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘this’, ‘she’, and ‘they’. It is difficult to accommodate the use of such terms with a Fregean theory that requires that the mode of presentation is the semantic value of a singular term in a propositional attitude clause. (See Perry 1977, 1979 and Kaplan 1977, pp. 529–36 for a development of the problem of indexicals and demonstratives. See Evans 1985 for an attempt to solve the problems indexicals pose for a Fregean solution to Frege’s puzzle. For more recent attempts, see Heck 2002.) Frege’s solution, remember, involves two claims: that indicating the sense is indicating the way the believer represents the individual and that belief attributions indicate the sense. These two claims seem to get the wrong results for propositional attitude reporting sentences with indexicals in their complement clauses. Consider, for example, the following sentence. Suppose that Bob Smith utters (10). Smith’s use of ‘I’ tells us nothing about how Alice represents Smith; in particular, it does not refer to or otherwise involve anything that we would ordinarily call the sense of ‘I’. (It would be strange indeed if what made the attribution true was Alice’s standing in the belief relation to a proposition containing the first-person mode of presentation associated with ‘I’ and the semantic value of ‘will solve an important problem in physics’. If there is such a first-person mode of presentation, then this is what it is for Alice to believe that she herself will solve an important problem in physics, which is not what Smith was saying in uttering (10).) Call this the problem of indexicals. (There is a large literature on this problem. A first wave of important work on the problem include Castañeda 1966,1967. 1999, Chisholm 1981, Evans 1982, especially chapters 6–7, Frege 1956, Lewis 1981, Perry 1977, 1979, Stalnaker 1981. For more recent important papers, see: Cappelen and Dever 2014, Garcia-Carpintero 2013, 2017, Magidor 2015, McKay 1986, Perry 1997, 1998, 2001, Recanati 2007.) The problem is that the perspective connected to a use of an indexical in an attitude report is not typically intended to match the perspective of the target of the report. For example, Jane might tell you that Lois believes that he is strong, pointing at Clark Kent, without expecting the perspective associated with her use of ‘he’ to match in any straightforward way Lois’s perspective. Indeed, it is quite intuitive that one might truly report another’s beliefs using a demonstrative to refer to something that agent is not in a position to refer to demonstratively in any way whatsoever. A related problem involves attributions of a common belief to many people. Like the problem of indexicals, this problem raises questions for the Fregean claim that a belief attribution indicates the way in which the believer represents an individual in belief. It seems plausible that different people associate different modes of presentation with the same name. If so, the following sort of sentence seems to prove difficult for the Fregean. Someone attributing such a belief cannot be responsible for the many modes of representation that the various believers associate with ‘Bob Smith’. It may seem that the theory could work in this case only if we could find a sense for ‘Bob Smith’ that does not vary from person to person and that can serve as the mode of presentation of that individual for each person. That seem unlikely. Let’s call this the problem of variability in sense. (See Richard 1988 for a development of the variability problem. See Forbes 1989, 1990 for an attempt to solve it.) Fregeans should accept that the truth of (10) does not require that Alice think of the speaker under a first-person mode of presentation associated with ‘I’ and that the truth of (11) does not require that everyone think of Smith in the same way. But, as a Fregean, they will insist that the truth of these reports require more than merely having beliefs with the relevant referential content. One way to pull this off is to attempt to construct a similarity class of modes of presentations. We say that the truth of (10) only requires that Alice think of the speaker in a suitably related way to the first-person mode of presentation the attributer associates with ‘I’ and (11) requires only that everyone think of Smith in some suitably related way to sense the attributer associates with ‘Bob Smith’. The work will all be done in specifying what it is for an arbitrary mode of presentation to be suitably related to the attributer’s mode of presentation. Presumably a Fregean would want the similarity class to be defined more narrowly than just in terms of co-reference. (Dummett 1973, p. 384 suggested that Frege subscribed to a view where reference-preservation sufficed for reports with indexicals. There is little plausibility to such a historical claim, particularly in light of Frege’s comments on indexicals in his 1918.) Finding such a middle ground between identity of sense and mere co-reference may well prove to be difficult indeed. However, much of what Mark Richard says in his 1990 (discussed below in  Section 6)  about restrictions on correlation functions can be employed by the Fregean to try to find this middle ground. So, the problems of indexicals and variability do not seem fatal to a broadly Fregean account of propositional attitude reporting sentences. Related to the above problems facing a Fregean view is the problem of intuitive entailment-successes. Suppose that Bill utters the sentence ‘I am happy’ and Lois believes him. Then, intuitively, there is something such that Bill said it and Lois believes it. But it is hard to see how the Fregean can account for such apparent entailment-successes, precisely because of the way in which the account explains intuitive entailment-failures like (1) and (4). There are many important neo-Fregean account that have been developed and promise to avoid these problems, including: Church 1951, Cumming 2008, Evans 1982, Forbes 1990, Garcia-Carpintero 2017, Heck 2002, 2012, 2014, Zalta 2001.) Many have taken the problems presented above to show that the only semantically relevant value of a singular term in the scope of a propositional attitude verb is its reference and so reject Fregean solution to Frege’s puzzle. But if we insist that the sole semantically relevant value of a singular term is its reference, what is there to say about the intuitive difference between (1) and (4) and the arguments that they differ in truth-value?