 The best-known aspect of Carnap’s reflections on semantics, however, concern his various controversies with Quine, which addressed a broad range of issues, two of which have aroused particular interest: ontology and “the” analytic-synthetic distinction. For many years after Quine launched his critique of Carnap, in the 1950s, it was widely agreed that Quine had “won”, and for several decades his paper “Two Dogmas of Empiricism” (Quine 1951) became perhaps the best-known and most widely cited paper in all analytic philosophy. However, since the revival of Carnap studies in the 1980s and 90s, the picture looks rather different, and if there is a mainstream opinion on the Carnap-Quine debates now, it would probably be something like the position articulated in a series of papers by Richard Creath (1987, 1990, 1991, 1994, 2007, 2009) to the effect that Quine at least partially misunderstood Carnap and that the two philosophers were largely talking past each other (while of course trying hard not to). With respect to reductionism (the second dogma of empiricism in Quine’s 1951), Quine rightly criticized the viability of Carnap’s radical reductionism in the Aufbau—which, however, Carnap himself gave up soon after the Aufbau’s publication. It is much less clear whether Quine is right to attribute a weaker form of reductionism to the later Carnap, as Carnap regards the confirmation of scientific hypotheses to be holistic and theory-relative from the Logic Syntax at the latest. This is discussed in more detail in the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Section 1). The other “dogma of empiricism” that Quine discerned in Carnap was his adherence to “the” analytic-synthetic distinction. Unlike Quine, though, Carnap was not primarily interested in defining analyticity for natural language, but rather in the construction of linguistic frameworks for which a coherent notion of analyticity could be defined in precise terms. Nor did Carnap imagine that there was a single unique such distinction; he thought rather that any such distinction had to be language-relative and himself constructed precise definitions of analyticity for a number of linguistic frameworks with different applications. True, Carnap also attempted in Syntax to give a general definition of “analytic” that would apply to all languages, but did not think even at the time that he had succeeded. He went on trying to find one, but never seriously proposed a solution. So Quine’s criticism of Carnap’s lack of definition of ‘analytic-in-language-L’ with variable ‘L’ was definitely sound, but it ran in open doors, as Carnap had never claimed to have supplied such a definition even to his own satisfaction. It is a matter of ongoing debate, though, whether Quine’s concerns somehow undermined Carnap’s definitions of analyticity for particular formal frameworks and whether these constructed and language-relative notions of analyticity (the existence of which was of course acknowledged by Quine) satisfied the conceptual role that Carnap ascribed to them. In any case, Carnap himself did not think that every language had to have analytic sentences. Most sophisticated language frameworks, especially those equipped for scientific statements, would need them, since the analytic sentences are just those that “come with” the framework (by being provable by the rules of the framework without further assumptions), but it is possible, Carnap thought, to design a language that has no analytic sentences. (In terms of a modern analogy: there are systems of non-classical logic, such as three-valued Strong-Kleene logic, which include an interesting and well-defined logical consequence relation, but where the set of logically true statements is empty.) He did not think this worth pursuing, though, since to him it was obvious that such a language would not be scientifically useful. He often cited Einstein’s (1921) insistence that without Hilbert’s strict distinction between physical geometry and mathematical “purely axiomatic” geometry (the latter of which was regarded as analytic by Carnap), Einstein could never have formulated the theory of relativity. The debate between Carnap and Quine about analytic and synthetic has produced a flood of commentary, which is still being added to (see, e.g., Juhl & Loomis 2010 or Ebbs 2017 for recent discussions, Proust 1986 [1989] for a broader historical perspective). The main points of the controversy, the main commentators, and Carnap’s own view of the matter are discussed in more detail in  Carnap vs Quine on the Analytic-Synthetic Distinction. On the subject of ontology, Quine criticized Carnap’s use of quantifiers over intensional entities in Carnap’s intensional semantics. Closely related criticisms were voiced by many others, especially including Carnap’s own former Vienna colleague Otto Neurath and the Oxford philosopher Gilbert Ryle, whose review of Meaning and Necessity (Ryle 1949) was perhaps the nastiest and most vituperative review ever written of anything Carnap wrote. Carnap responded (calmly) with his well-known paper “Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology” (1950a), in which he distinguished between two understandings of “existence” attributions, internal and external. Internal ones are framework-relative; they specify a language framework before claiming or denying or questioning the existence of a thing. External existence claims or questions lack such a relativization to a framework. For Carnap only internal questions make sense, if you take them literally. Thus “are there infinitely many numbers?” makes sense if you relativize it to a framework such as, for instance, Zermelo-Frankel set theory—which has an axiom of infinity, so the answer is (trivially) yes. But without such a relativization the question makes no sense to Carnap—unless, that is, you reinterpret it as a practical (normative) question of deciding among frameworks or explications. All of this applies, in particular, to the quantification over abstract entities in a framework for semantics, such as intensional semantics. In turn, Quine rejected Carnap’s internal/external distinction, which for Quine relied on the analytic/synthetic distinction, as accepting a framework would consist in accepting the sentences that are analytic in the framework. Whether the ontological internal/external distinction needs to build on the semantic analytic/synthetic distinction has itself become a topic in recent philosophical work on metaphysical deflationism about existence questions, which takes Carnap’s metaontological views as its historical starting point (see, e.g., Thomasson 2014; see the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology (Sections 2 and 3)  for further discussion).