 As we saw in  section 2  above, the Aufbau project began as a continuation of the encyclopedic ambitions of the Enlightenment, in response to the catastrophe of the war and the hopes inspired by the German revolution—only that in contrast to the eighteenth-century Encyclopédistes, and to similar projects since then, Carnap conceived the idea of a system of knowledge as a deductive system, under the influence of his teacher Frege. By the time of the book’s publication the emphasis had shifted, but the idea of bringing all concepts into a single deductive system survives. In a popular lecture given in Vienna in 1929, Carnap explains the point of his book by telling a dialectical story of human history as a struggle between “critical intellect” and “imagination”. At first imagination ruled the day, but then in antiquity, critical intellect made a discovery that enabled it to put strict limits on imagination’s claims: That is the discovery of one [single] comprehensive space. All things are in space; any two things are always spatially related to each other. So there is also a path from me to any [given] thing. So existence claims could now be subjected to a simple test: Every thing is accessible. If someone now claims that a thing of a particular kind exists, I can demand of him that he show me the path from me to the claimed thing. Imagination responds by relocating its gods and gremlins to remote or inaccessible locations, but as humankind explores more of the earth, this stops working. So imagination “goes for a really radical option; it evacuates its creations to the non-spatial, the ‘trans-spatial’”, which is plausible since we quite legitimately refer to things that are not physical objects, so not locatable in space. Feelings, mental images, and thoughts, for instance, are non-spatial. So instead of situating its gods in a physical location such as Mount Olympus, Carnap explained, the putative God was removed from space into the realm of the spirits. God was regarded now as a spiritual being without a body. But people starting noticing “that something isn’t quite right with that sort of claim, that there is something rather odd, something problematic about it”. So imagination went further and replaced theology with metaphysics. Here the concept of God no longer has anything physical or anything physically rooted about it… The flight from the grasp of critical reason with its spatial system appears to have been completely successful. But critical intellect now has an answer: the Aufbau system—“now a system is discovered that comprehends not just [corporeal] things, but everything thinkable, all concepts, whether thing-like or not”. This system is the natural successor and generalization, in Carnap’s dialectical drama, of physically all-encompassing space: In space all things have spatial relations to each other, and there has to be a path of access from me to each thing. In the same way, on the basis of the concept-system, an all-comprehending conceptual space, so to speak, all concepts have relations to each other (in this case logical, conceptual relations). And here there has to be a connecting path to each concept from the contents of my experience, e.g., from my perceptions. Everything of which I can speak has to be traceable back to things experienced by me. All knowledge I can have relates either to my own feelings, mental images, thoughts, etc. or can be derived from my perceptions… Though Carnap had redesigned the system in 1924 to dispense with the phenomenological development of the “primary world” from which the “realities” or “secondary worlds” of science and everyday reality were constructed, it could be said that he adopted Husserl’s method of “bracketing” the supposed external reality to which our subjective world appears to refer—and that he adopted it more radically and strictly than Husserl himself. For Carnap bracketed not just the external reality but also the internal subjectivity, leaving only the bare logical structure of the constitution system unbracketed (Carus 2016). In the published Aufbau this abstemious bracketing policy is applied very strictly. Carnap adopts a principle of extensionality that does not exclude the use of intensional languages in auxiliary roles, but denies them any ultimate significance. Fregean “Sinn” (sense) is specifically excluded as merely psychological (§44), having only “epistemic value” but not “logical value” (§50), which is limited to the extensional meaning of an expression. Each step in the spelled-out constitution of the subjective (“autopsychological”) world is explained not only in logical symbols but also in a simple paraphrase, then in “realistic language” (as ordinarily used in science) and finally in a language of “fictive construction”. But Carnap makes clear that this is solely for convenience and to make the steps more transparent to readers. The four languages may differ not only in form but in their “Sinn”, their epistemic value (the different mental images they elicit), he says, though their logical value is always identical and is expressed most neutrally and clearly in the symbolic language (§95); for more detail, see the supplement  Aufbau. Behind this radical extensionalism lies precisely the new strictness with which Carnap applied the Husserlian “bracketing” strategy in 1924—ironically just at the time he abandoned the phenomenological development of the constitutional basis. (More details on Carnap’s extensionalism are to be found in the supplement  Semantics (Section 2).)  The most direct expression of this was a more thoroughgoing and self-conscious rejection of ontology. In the final chapter of the Aufbau, which addresses some philosophical problems to which the constitutional system can be applied, the overriding theme is the irrelevance of ontological questions to the actual constitutional system (Friedman 2007). And in the same year as the Aufbau Carnap published a pamphlet on Pseudo-problems in Philosophy (Carnap 1928b) in which the “problem of realism” is the most prominent example of such pseudo-problems. The actual detailed construction of the autopsychological realm occupies only a small part of the book. The first sections focus largely on what Carnap would later call “clarification of the explicandum” (see  section 1.1  above). Carnap considers various options for the choice of basic elements (the elements or building blocks of which everything is to be constructed) and basic relations (the relations between and among these building blocks that is to effect the construction). The radicalism of Carnap’s push for simplification is expressed by his choice of only a single kind of basic elements, “elementary experiences”, and a single basic relation, “recollection of similarity”. The elementary experiences were not isolated “sense data” of traditional empiricism (the isolated pitch and timbre of momentary sounds or colored points of the visual field that we find in Hume or Mach), but holistic time slices of total experience, from which nothing has yet been abstracted; Carnap was here attempting to do justice to the psychology courses he had taken as an undergraduate, where he had learned about the new directions taken in Gestalt psychology by Köhler, Koffka, and others. By quasianalysis, an abstraction technique formalizing Russell’s “principle of abstraction”, (see the supplement  Methodology (Section 3))  the similarities among these time-slices could retrospectively be grouped (by repeated application of the basic relation, recollection of similarity) into something like equivalence classes of, say, a certain color or a certain smell that were sufficiently similar. By this means Carnap constructs the subjective cognitive world of a single mind in some detail, up to the point where, on that basis, a three-dimensional objective world of space-time can be constructed (see the supplement  Aufbau (Section 2)  for more detail concerning some of these constructions). At this crucial point of the Aufbau (§§125–7), the ascent from two to three dimensions, where Carnap stops spelling out the steps in detail, he also suspends the explicit definition applied up to there, and instead resorts to an informally described optimization approach, whereby certain fairly obvious desiderata (continuity of motions, temporal continuity of objects and processes, etc.) are to be maximized subject to certain (again fairly obvious) constraints (see the supplement  Aufbau (Section 3)  for further details). The construction of the physical realm and the further realms on its basis (the heteropsychological, social, cultural, and value realms) are sketched very sparsely. The book ends with a final section discussing some philosophical consequences of the constitution system, addressing (though only obliquely, and hardly by name) both phenomenology and various forms of realism. When the book was published in 1928, it was widely discussed and, along with Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, became one of the classic texts of the Vienna Circle. Its effect was amplified in the English-speaking world by A.J. Ayer’s endorsement of it in his best-selling Language, Truth, and Logic (Ayer 1936), which however misrepresented the book quite seriously. This misrepresentation contributed to the neglect of the book among Anglo-American philosophers, which even the sophisticated discussion, critique, and further development by Nelson Goodman (1951) or the belated English translation (1967) could not affect. It also allowed many preconceptions about the book to continue circulating almost through the end of the twentieth century. Only toward the end of that century did a revaluation set in, initiated by Michael Friedman, who took issue, in a series of papers (later collected in Friedman 1999), with the entire English-speaking tradition (going back to Ayer) of seeing the Aufbau as a phenomenalist project of reducing all knowledge to sense impressions on the model of Hume or Mach. Instead, Friedman pointed out, we should see it in the context of its neo-Kantian origins. From that perspective, the Aufbau is better understood as seeking a new basis of scientific objectivity—achieving objective knowledge despite the subjective starting point of individual perception, and the structuralism discussed above  (section 3.2).  On the basis of Friedman’s discussions, many others have since contributed to the revaluation of the Aufbau (Richardson 1998; Mormann 2000; Pincock 2005, 2009; the papers collected in Damböck 2016.) This new interpretive interest in the Aufbau and its philosophical context has also led to renewed efforts to reconstruct the Aufbau’s constitution system with new tools. Goodman’s 1951 critique of quasianalysis has finally found responses and repairs from Mormann (1994, 1997, 2009) and Leitgeb (2007); Leitgeb (2011) goes further and argues that if the goals of the Aufbau strategy are limited in certain ways, Goodman’s and Quine’s critiques no longer apply (see the supplement  Aufbau (Sections 3 and 4)).  Chalmers (2012) suggests a much more drastic rationalistic revision of the Aufbau; where Carnap thought it would be possible, in principle, to derive all true scientific sentences whatsoever from basic true sentences in an “empiricistically acceptable” constitution system just by means of the system’s definitions, Chalmers drops any empiricist ambitions and replaces the role of definitions by that of a priori knowledge, including synthetic a priori knowledge (whose existence Carnap of course denied).