 The significance of Russell’s paradox can be seen once it is realized that, using classical logic, all sentences follow from a contradiction. For example, assuming both P and ~P, any arbitrary proposition, Q, can be proved as follows: from P we obtain P ∨ Q by the rule of Addition; then from P ∨ Q and ~P we obtain Q by the rule of Disjunctive Syllogism. Because set theory underlies all branches of mathematics, many people began to worry that the inconsistency of set theory would mean that no mathematical proof could be completely trustworthy. Only by eliminating Russell’s paradox could mathematics as a whole regain its consistency. Russell’s paradox ultimately stems from the idea that any condition or property may be used to determine a set. For example, the property of being evenly divisible by only itself and the number one distinguishes the set of prime numbers from the set of whole numbers. The property of having mammary glands distinguishes the set of mammals from reptiles, birds and other living organisms. The property of being both square and not square (or any other conjunction of contradictory properties) determines the empty set, and so on. One early skeptic concerning an unrestricted Comprehension (or Abstraction) axiom was the originator of modern set theory, Georg Cantor. Even prior to Russell’s discovery, Cantor had rejected unrestricted Comprehension in favour of what was, in effect, a distinction between sets and classes, recognizing that some properties (such as the property of being an ordinal) produced collections that were simply too large to be sets, and that any assumption to the contrary would lead to inconsistency. (Details can be found in Moore (1982), Hallett (1984) and Menzel (1984).) Russell’s own response to the paradox came with his aptly named  theory of types. Believing that self-application lay at the heart of the paradox, Russell’s basic idea was that we can avoid commitment to R (the set of all sets that are not members of themselves) by arranging all sentences (or, more precisely, all  propositional functions,  functions which give propositions as their values) into a hierarchy.  It is then possible to refer to all objects for which a given condition (or predicate) holds only if they are all at the same level or of the same “type.” This solution to Russell’s paradox is motivated in large part by adoption of the so-called vicious circle principle. The principle in effect states that no propositional function can be defined prior to specifying the function’s scope of application. In other words, before a function can be defined, one must first specify exactly those objects to which the function will apply (the function’s domain).  For example, before defining the predicate “is a prime number,” one first needs to define the collection of objects that might possibly satisfy this predicate, namely the set, N, of natural numbers. As Whitehead and Russell explain, An analysis of the paradoxes to be avoided shows that they all result from a kind of vicious circle. The vicious circles in question arise from supposing that a collection of objects may contain members which can only be defined by means of the collection as a whole. Thus, for example, the collection of propositions will be supposed to contain a proposition stating that “all propositions are either true or false.” It would seem, however, that such a statement could not be legitimate unless “all propositions” referred to some already definite collection, which it cannot do if new propositions are created by statements about “all propositions.” We shall, therefore, have to say that statements about “all propositions” are meaningless. … The principle which enables us to avoid illegitimate totalities may be stated as follows: “Whatever involves all of a collection must not be one of the collection”; or, conversely: “If, provided a certain collection had a total, it would have members only definable in terms of that total, then the said collection has no total.” We shall call this the “vicious-circle principle,” because it enables us to avoid the vicious circles involved in the assumption of illegitimate totalities. (1910, 2nd edn 37) If Whitehead and Russell are right, it follows that no function’s scope of application will ever be able to include any object presupposed by the function itself. As a result, propositional functions (along with their corresponding propositions) will end up being arranged in a hierarchy of the kind Russell proposes. Although Russell first introduced his theory of types in his 1903 Principles of Mathematics, he recognized immediately that more work needed to be done since his initial account seemed to resolve some but not all of the paradoxes. Among the alternatives he considered was a so-called substitutional theory (Galaugher 2013). This in turn led to type theory’s more mature expression five years later in Russell’s 1908 article, “Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types,” and in the monumental work he co-authored with  Alfred North Whitehead,  Principia Mathematica  (1910, 1912, 1913). Russell’s type theory thus appears in two versions: the “simple theory” of 1903 and the “ramified theory” of 1908.  Both versions have been criticized for being too ad hoc to eliminate the paradox successfully. In response to Russell’s paradox,  David Hilbert also expanded his program of building a consistent, axiomatic foundation for mathematics so that it included an axiomatic foundation for logic and set theory (Peckhaus 2004).  Underlying this formalist approach was the idea of allowing the use of only finite, well-defined and constructible objects, together with rules of inference deemed to be absolutely certain. Finally, Luitzen Brouwer developed intuitionism, whose basic idea was that one cannot assert the existence of a mathematical object unless one can define a procedure for constructing it. Together, all of these responses helped focus attention on the connections between logic, language and mathematics. They also helped logicians develop an explicit awareness of the nature of formal systems and of the kinds of metalogical and metamathematical results that have proved to be central to research in the foundations of logic and mathematics over the past one hundred years.