 Although Russell became a convert to the doctrines of Principia Ethica, he disagreed with Moore on two important points. Russell, like Moore was what is nowadays known as a consequentialist. He believed that the rightness or otherwise of an act is “in some way, dependent on consequences”. But for the young Moore, it is “demonstrably certain” (!) that “I am morally bound to perform this action” is identical [that is synonymous] with the assertion “This action will produce the greatest amount of possible good in the Universe” (PE: ch. 5, §89). Thus it is analytic that the right thing to do is the action that will, actually produce the best consequences. But in Russell's view this claim is neither analytic nor true. Moore's own Open Question Argument can be deployed to prove that it is not analytic, and a little critical reflection reveals that it is not true. It is held [by Moore] that what we ought to do is that action, among all that are possible, which will produce the best results on the whole; and this is regarded as constituting a definition of ought. I hold that this is not a definition, but a significant proposition, and in fact a false one. (RoE: 101/Papers 4: 573) It is a “significant” or non-analytic proposition because a competent speaker can believe that X is the act that will produce the best consequences without believing that she ought to do it. If the two propositions “X is the act available to me that will produce the best consequences” and “I ought to do X” were really synonymous, then a competent speaker could not believe the one whilst remaining in doubt about the other. Since this is perfectly possible (as is shown by the fact that “Ought I to do what will have the best results?” is an obstinately open question for competent speakers of English) the two claims are not synonymous (W.D. Ross developed a similar line of argument in The Right and the Good (1930) but it was Russell who convinced Moore that he was wrong. See Moore 1942: 558). But the fact that these claims are not synonymous does not show that it is false that I ought to do that act which will, in fact, produce the best consequences. The latter claim could be synthetic (or, as Russell would have it, “significant”) but true. Why does Russell think it false? Russell raises the ad hominem objection that Moore's thesis is flatly inconsistent with the moral conservatism that he goes on to embrace. According to Moore, although “there are cases where [an established moral] rule should be broken”, since “in some cases the neglect of an established moral rule will be the best course of action possible”, nevertheless, “we can never know what those cases are, and ought, therefore, never to break it” (PE: §99). “The individual, therefore, can be confidently recommended always to conform to rules which are generally useful and generally practiced.” But if we ought to perform the best action possible, what this implies is that there are some cases (though we can never know which) where we ought to do what it is not the case that we ought to do. Moore could avoid this contradiction by adopting the view that what we ought to do is that action which we have reason to believe will produce the best consequences. As Russell himself put it, Moore's moral conservatism “implies that we ought to do what we have reason to think will have the best results, rather than what really will have the best results” [my italics]—since, in any given instance, we may have reason to think that the conventionally right act will have the best consequences even though we know that this won't always be the case. But Russell did not reject Moore's brand of consequentialism because it was inconsistent with his moral conservatism, since he also rejected Moore's moral conservatism. As he informed Moore by letter, he regarded his views on Practical Ethics as “unduly Conservative and anti-reforming”. However, anybody who thinks that there are some actions which we ought to do even though, as a matter of fact they won't have the best consequences must, reject Moore's view.  And it is precisely because he believes this that Russell rejects Moore's brand of consequentialism. “Some people”, says Russell, “whom I refrain from naming, might with advantage to the world have been strangled in infancy; but we cannot blame the good women who brought them up for having omitted this precaution.” So if Stalin's mother (say) did the right thing in not strangling him at birth, then it follows that the right thing to do is not always the act with the best actual consequences. Russell admits that his view is not without paradox, since if it sometimes right to do what is actually disastrous, it follows that it can sometimes be “a pity [that] a man did his duty”, a thesis which Moore regards as “a contradiction in terms”. But paradoxical as this may seem, it is only a contradiction on the assumption that “the right action” simply means “the action with the best actual consequences”, an assumption which Moore's own Open Question Argument proves to be false. Moore's view, by contrast, is contradictory however “right” and “ought” are to be defined, since it implies that we sometimes ought to perform acts which (since they are not optimific) it is not the case that we ought to perform. Russell's criticisms can be summed up as follows: These three theses jointly imply that we sometimes ought to do things that it is not the case that we ought to do. Russell gently points out this contradiction and suggests, in effect, that Moore could resolve it by modifying (1) to (1′). Moore accepted argument A (see his “Reply to My Critics”: 558), and in his later book Ethics (1912) he treats consequentialism as a synthetic thesis. It is, I think, quite plain that the meaning of the two words [“expedience” and “duty”] is not the same; for if it were, then it would be a mere tautology to say that it is always our duty to do what will have the best possible consequences. Our theory does not, therefore, do away with the distinction between the meaning of the two words “duty” and “expediency”; it only implies that both will always apply to the same actions. (Ethics: 89) He also seems to have accepted Russell's ad hominem argument B—that, given the fairly obvious fact that doing the done thing does not always produce the best results, his actualist brand of consequentialism is inconsistent with his moral conservatism. However, he did not resolve the problem by modifying thesis (1) as Russell, in effect, recommended—instead he resolved it by dropping thesis (3). In Principia, moral conservatism had been “confidently recommended” to the conscientious “individual”. By the time Moore came to write Ethics in 1912 it had simply disappeared, leaving the puzzled “individual” bereft of practical guidance. What ought the individual to do, when, as is usually the case, she cannot determine, which of the available acts will have the best total consequences?  Moore does not say, thereby sacrificing helpfulness to theoretical consistency.