 Central to any theory of sets is a statement of the conditions under which sets are formed. In addition to simply listing the members of a set, it was initially assumed that any well-defined condition (or precisely specified property) could be used to determine a set. For example, if T is the property of being a teacup, then the set, S, of all teacups might be defined as S = {x: T(x)}, the set of all individuals, x, such that x has the property of being T. Even a contradictory property might be used to determine a set. For example, the property of being both T and not-T would determine the empty set, the set having no members. More precisely, naïve set theory assumes the so-called naïve or unrestricted Comprehension Axiom, the axiom that for any formula φ(x) containing x as a free variable, there will exist the set {x: φ(x)} whose members are exactly those objects that satisfy φ(x). Thus, if the formula φ(x) stands for “x is prime”, then {x: φ(x)} will be the set of prime numbers. If φ(x) stands for “~(x = x)”, then {x: φ(x)} will be the empty set. But from the assumption of this axiom, Russell’s contradiction follows. For example, if we let φ(x) stand for x ∈ x and let R = {x: ~φ(x)}, then R is the set whose members are exactly those objects that are not members of themselves. Is R a member of itself? If it is, then it must satisfy the condition of not being a member of itself and so it is not. If it is not, then it must not satisfy the condition of not being a member of itself, and so it must be a member of itself. Since by classical logic one case or the other must hold – either R is a member of itself or it is not – it follows that the theory implies a contradiction. As Russell tells us, it was after he applied the same kind of reasoning found in Cantor’s diagonal argument to a “supposed class of all imaginable objects” that he was led to the contradiction: Standard responses to the paradox attempt to limit in some way the conditions under which sets are formed. The goal is usually both to eliminate R (and similar contradictory sets) and, at the same time, to retain all other sets needed for mathematics. This is often done by replacing the unrestricted Comprehension Axiom with the more restrictive Separation Axiom, namely the axiom that given any (consistent) set S and any formula φ(x) with x free, there will be a set {x ∈ S: φ(x)} whose members are exactly those members of S that satisfy φ(x). If we now let φ(x) stand for the formula x ∉ x, it turns out that the corresponding set, {x ∈ S: x ∉ x} will not be contradictory since it consists only of those members found within S that are not members of themselves. Hence the set fails to include itself. A variety of related paradoxes is discussed in the second chapter of the Introduction to Whitehead and Russell (1910, 2nd edn 60-65), as well as in the entry on  paradoxes and contemporary logic  in this encyclopedia.