 Russell’s paradox is sometimes seen as a negative development – as bringing down Frege’s Grundgesetze and as one of the original conceptual sins leading to our expulsion from Cantor’s paradise.  W.V. Quine describes the paradox as an “antinomy” that “packs a surprise that can be accommodated by nothing less than a repudiation of our conceptual heritage” (1966, 11). Quine is referring to the Naïve Comprehension principle mentioned earlier. In symbols, the principle states that where A is not free in the formula φ.This says, “There is a set A such that for any object x, x is an element of A if and only if the condition expressed by φ holds.” Russell’s paradox arises by taking φ to be the formula: x ∉ x. Despite Quine’s comment, it is possible to see Russell’s paradox in a more positive light. For one thing, although the matter remains controversial, later research has revealed that the paradox does not necessarily short circuit Frege’s derivation of arithmetic from logic alone. Frege’s version of NC (his Axiom V) can simply be abandoned. (For details, see the entry on Frege’s Theorem.)  For another,  Church gives an elegant formulation of the simple theory of types that has proven fruitful even in areas removed from the foundations of mathematics. (For details, see the entry on Type Theory.) Finally, the development of axiomatic (as opposed to naïve) set theories which exhibit various ingenious and mathematically and philosophically significant ways of dealing with Russell’s paradox paved the way for stunning results in the metamathematics of set theory. These results have included Gödel’s and Cohen’s theorems on the independence of the axiom of choice and Cantor’s continuum hypothesis. So let us see, roughly, how some of these methods – specifically, the so-called “untyped” methods – deal with Russell’s paradox. Zermelo replaces NC with the following axiom schema of Separation (or Aussonderungsaxiom): Again, to avoid circularity, B cannot be free in φ. This demands that in order to gain entry into B, x must be a member of an existing set A. As one might imagine, this requires a host of additional set-existence axioms, none of which would be required if NC had held up. How does ZA avoid Russell’s paradox?  One might think at first that it doesn’t. After all, if we let A be V – the whole universe of sets – and φ be x ∉ x, a contradiction again appears to arise. But in this case, all the contradiction shows is that V is not a set.  All the contradiction shows is that “V” is an empty name (i.e., that it has no reference, that V does not exist), since the ontology of Zermelo’s system consists solely of sets. This same point can be made in yet another way, involving a relativized form of Russell’s argument.  Let B be any set. By ZA, the set RB = {x ∈ B: x ∉ x} exists, but it cannot be an element of B.  For if it is an element of B, then we can ask whether or not it is an element of RB; and it is if and only if it is not.  Thus something, namely RB, is “missing” from each set B.  So again, V is not a set, since nothing can be missing from V.  But notice the following subtlety: unlike the previous argument involving the direct application of Aussonderungs to V, the present argument hints at the idea that, while V is not a set, “V” is not an empty name.  The next strategy for dealing with Russell’s paradox capitalizes on this hint. John von Neumann’s (1925) untyped method for dealing with paradoxes, and with Russell’s paradox in particular, is simple and ingenious. Von Neumann introduces a distinction between membership and non-membership and, on this basis, draws a distinction between sets and classes. An object is a member (simpliciter) if it is a member of some class; and it is a non-member if it is not a member of any class. (Actually, von Neumann develops a theory of functions, taken as primitive, rather than classes, wherein corresponding to the member/non-member distinction one has a distinction between an object that can be an argument of some function and one that cannot. In its modern form, due to Bernays and Gödel, it is a single-sorted theory of classes.) Sets are then defined as members, and non-members are labeled “proper classes.” So for example, the Russell class, R, cannot be a member of any class, and hence it must be a proper class.  If R is assumed to be an element of a class A, then it follows from one of von Neumann’s axioms that R is not equivalent to V. But R is equivalent to V, and hence not an element of A.  Thus, von Neumann’s method is closely related to the result stated above about the set RB, for arbitrary B. Von Neumann’s method, while admired by the likes of Gödel and Bernays, has been undervalued in recent years. Quine (1937) and (1967) similarly provide another untyped method (in letter if not in spirit) of blocking Russell’s paradox, and one that is rife with interesting anomalies. Quine’s basic idea is to introduce a stratified comprehension axiom. In effect, the axiom blocks circularity by introducing a hierarchy (or stratification) that is similar to type theory in some ways, and dissimilar in others. (Details can be found in the entry on  Quine’s New Foundations.) In contrast to Zermelo’s, von Neumann’s and Quine’s strategies, which are in a sense purely set theoretic, there have also been attempts to avoid Russell’s paradox by altering the underlying logic.  There have been many such attempts and we shall not review them all, but one stands out as being, at the moment, both radical and somewhat popular (although not with set theorists per se): this is the paraconsistent approach, which limits the overall effect of an isolated contradiction on an entire theory.  Classical logic mandates that any contradiction trivializes a theory by making every sentence of the theory provable.  This is because, in classical logic, the following is a theorem: Now, virtually the only way to avoid EFQ is to give up disjunctive syllogism, that is, given the usual definitions of the connectives, modus ponens! So altering basic sentential logic in this way is radical indeed – but possible.  Unfortunately, even giving up EFQ is not enough to retain a semblance of NC.  One also has to give up the following additional theorem of basic sentential logic: It can then be argued that NC leads directly, not merely to an isolated contradiction, but to triviality.  (For the argument that this is so, see the entry on  Curry’s paradox,  section 2.2. Note too that it is not enough merely to retain the name “modus ponens”; it is the rule itself that becomes modified within non-traditional logics.)  Thus it seems that the woes of NC are not confined to Russell’s paradox but also include a negation-free paradox due to Curry. Another suggestion might be to conclude that the paradox depends upon an instance of the principle of Excluded Middle, that either R is a member of R or it is not. This is a principle that is rejected by some non-classical approaches to logic, including intuitionism. However it is possible to formulate the paradox without appealing to Excluded Middle by relying instead upon the Law of Non-contradiction. We do so as follows: Given the definition of R it follows that R ∈ R ≡ ~(R ∈ R). So R ∈ R ⊃ ~(R ∈ R). But we also know that R ∈ R ⊃ R ∈ R. So R ∈ R ⊃ (R ∈ R ∧ ~(R ∈ R)). But by the Law of Non-contradiction we know that ~(R ∈ R ∧ ~(R ∈ R)). So by modus tollens we conclude that ~(R ∈ R). At the same time we also know that since R ∈ R ≡ ~(R ∈ R), it follows that ~(R ∈ R) ⊃ R ∈ R, and thus that R ∈ R. So we can deduce both R ∈ R and its negation using only intutionistically acceptable methods. It seems, therefore, that proponents of non-classical logics cannot claim to have preserved NC in any significant sense, other than preserving the purely syntactical form of the principle, and neither intuitionism nor paraconsistency plus the abandonment of Contraction will offer an advantage over the untyped solutions of Zermelo, von Neumann, or Quine. (Further discussion can be found in Meyer, Routley and Dunn (1979), Irvine (1992), Priest (2006, ch. 18), Weber (2010), Weber (2012), and in the entries on  Curry’s paradox (sec. 2.2) and  paraconsistent logic (sec. 2.3).) It is also worth noting that Russell’s paradox was not the only paradox that troubled Russell and, hence, not the only motivation for the type restrictions one finds in Principia Mathematica. In his earlier work, The Principles of Mathematics, Russell devotes a chapter to “the Contradiction” (Russell’s paradox), presenting it in several forms and dismissing several non-starter responses.  He then signals that he will “shortly” discuss the doctrine of types.  This doesn’t happen for several hundred pages, until we reach the very end of the book, in Appendix B!  There Russell presents an incipient, simple theory of types, not the theory of types we find in Principia Mathematica. Why was the later theory needed?  The reason is that in Appendix B Russell also presents another paradox which he thinks cannot be resolved by means of the simple theory of types. This new paradox concerns propositions, not classes, and it, together with the semantic paradoxes, led Russell to formulate his ramified version of the theory of types. The new, propositional version of the paradox has not figured prominently in the subsequent development of logic and set theory, but it sorely puzzled Russell. For one thing, it seems to contradict Cantor’s theorem.  Russell writes: “We cannot admit that there are more ranges [classes of propositions] than propositions” (1903, 527).  The reason is that there seem to be easy, one to one correlations between classes of propositions and propositions.  For example, the class m of propositions can be correlated with the proposition that every proposition in m is true.  This, together with a fine-grained principle of individuation for propositions (asserting, for one thing, that if the classes m and n of propositions differ, then any proposition about m will differ from any proposition about n) leads to contradiction. There has been relatively little discussion of this paradox, although it played a key role in the development of Church’s logic of sense and denotation.  While we have several set theories to choose from, we do not have anything like a well-developed theory of Russellian propositions, although such propositions are central to the views of Millians and direct-reference theorists.  One would think that such a theory would be required for the foundations of semantics, if not for the foundations of mathematics. Thus, while one of Russell’s paradoxes has led to the fruitful development of the foundations of mathematics, his “other” paradox has yet to lead to anything remotely similar in the foundations of semantics. To be sure, Church (1974a) and Anderson (1989) have attempted to develop a Russellian intensional logic based on the ramified theory of types, but an argument can be made that the ramified theory is too restrictive to serve as a foundation for the semantics of natural language.  There have also been some recent attempts to obtain the beginnings of a Russellian intensional logic based on untyped set theories (Cantini 2004; Deutsch 2014).  It is rather ironic that although fine-grained Russellian propositions are favored in the philosophy of language, the formal development of intensional logic is dominated by Montague grammar, with its course-grained theory of propositions. It is also worth noting that a number of seemingly purely set-theoretical principles are actually (applied) instances of theorems of pure logic (i.e., of first-order quantification theory with identity)!  There is a (partial) list of these in Kalish, Montague, and Mar (2000).  Russell’s paradox is an instance of T269 in this list: Reading the dyadic predicate letter “F” as “is a member of”, this says that it is not the case that there is a y such that for any x, x is a member of y if and only if x is not a member of x. Does this mean that Russell’s paradox reduces to T269? Certainly the proof of T269 distills the essence of Russell’s argument, its pattern of reasoning.  But that pattern also underwrites an endless list of seemingly frivolous “paradoxes” such as the famous paradox of the barber who shaves all and only those who do not shave themselves or, similarly, the paradox of the benevolent but efficient God who helps all and only those who do not help themselves. How do these “pseudo paradoxes,” as they are sometimes called, differ, if at all, from Russell’s paradox?  The pattern of reasoning is the same and the conclusion – that there is no such Barber, no such efficient God, no such set of non-self-membered sets – is the same: such things simply don’t exist. (However, as von Neumann showed, it is not necessary to go quite this far.  Von Neumann’s method instructs us not that such things as R do not exist, but just that we cannot say much about them, inasmuch as R and the like cannot fall into the extension of any predicate that qualifies as a class.) The standard answer to this question is that the difference lies in the subject matter.  Quine asks, “why does it [Russell’s paradox] count as an antinomy and the barber paradox not?”; and he answers, “The reason is that there has been in our habits of thought an overwhelming presumption of there being such a class but no presumption of there being such a barber” (1966, 14).  Even so, psychological talk of “habits of thought” is not particularly illuminating.  More to the point, Russell’s paradox sensibly gives rise to the question of what sets there are; but it is nonsense to wonder, on such grounds as T269, what barbers or Gods there are! This verdict, however, is not quite fair to fans of the Barber or of T269 generally.  They will insist that the question raised by T269 is not what barbers or Gods there are, but rather what non-paradoxical objects there are.  This question is virtually the same as that raised by Russell’s paradox itself.  Thus, from this perspective, the relation between the Barber and Russell’s paradox is much closer than many (following Quine) have been willing to allow (Salmon 2013). We note that there is a first-order logical formula that bears the same relation to the principle about the RB’s that T269 bears to Russell’s paradox. It is the following: (We have taken the liberty of extending the numbering used in Kalish, Montague and Mar (2000) to T273.)  But not all set-theoretic paradoxes are similarly related to first-order logical theorems.  The Burali-Forti paradox is an example, since the notion of a well-ordering is not elementary; that is, it is not first-order definable. Russell’s paradox has never been passé, but recently there has been an explosion of interest in it by scholars involved in research in mathematical logic and in philosophical and historical studies of modern logic.  A glance at the contents of the 2004 volume One Hundred Years of Russell’s Paradox shows prominent mathematical and philosophical logicians and historians of logic pouring over the paradox, proposing new ways back into Cantor’s paradise, or other ways of resolving the issue. Their investigations include radically new ways out of the dilemma posed by the paradox, new studies of the theories of types (simple and ramified, and extensions thereof), new interpretations of Russell’s paradox and constructive theories, of Russell’s paradox of propositions and of his own attempt at an untyped theory (the substitution theory), and so forth. All of this reminds us that fruitful work can arise from the most unlikely of observations. As Dana Scott has put it, “It is to be understood from the start that Russell’s paradox is not to be regarded as a disaster. It and the related paradoxes show that the naïve notion of all-inclusive collections is untenable. That is an interesting result, no doubt about it” (1974, 207).