 Russell appears to have discovered his paradox in the late spring of 1901, while working on his Principles of Mathematics (1903). Exactly when the discovery took place is not clear. Russell initially states that he came across the paradox “in June 1901” (1944, 13).  Later he reports that the discovery took place “in the spring of 1901” (1959, 75).  Still later he reports that he came across the paradox, not in June, but in May of that year (1969, 221). Cesare Burali-Forti, an assistant to Giuseppe Peano, had discovered a similar antinomy in 1897 when he noticed that since the set of ordinals is well-ordered, it too must have an ordinal. However, this ordinal must be both an element of the set of all ordinals and yet greater than every such element. Unlike Burali-Forti’s paradox, Russell’s paradox does not involve either ordinals or cardinals, relying instead only on the primitive notions of set and set inclusion. Zermelo noticed a similar contradiction sometime between 1897 and 1902, possibly anticipating Russell by some years (Ebbinghaus and Peckhaus 2007, 43–48; Tappenden 2013, 336), although Kanamori concludes that the discovery could easily have been as late as 1902 (Kanamori 2009, 411). In any case, the paradox was thought to be of minor importance until it was realized how detrimental it was to Gottlob Frege's  foundations for mathematics. Russell wrote to Frege with news of his paradox on June 16, 1902. (For the relevant correspondence, see Russell (1902) and Frege (1902) in van Heijenoort (1967).)  The paradox was of significance to Frege’s logical work since, in effect, it showed that the axioms Frege was using to formalize his logic were inconsistent. Specifically, Frege’s Axiom V requires that an expression such as φ(x) be considered both a function of the argument x and a function of the argument φ. (More precisely, Frege’s Law states that the course-of-values of a concept f is identical to the course-of-values of a concept g if and only if f and g agree on the value of every argument, i.e., if and only if for every object x, f(x) = g(x). See section 2.4.1 of the entry on Gottlob Frege in this encyclopedia for more discussion.) In effect, it was this ambiguity that allowed Russell to construct R in such a way that it could both be and not be a member of itself. Russell’s letter arrived just as the second volume of Frege’s  Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (The Basic Laws of Arithmetic, 1893, 1903) was in press. Immediately appreciating the difficulty the paradox posed, Frege added to the Grundgesetze a hastily composed appendix discussing Russell’s discovery. In the appendix Frege observes that the consequences of Russell’s paradox are not immediately clear. For example, “Is it always permissible to speak of the extension of a concept, of a class? And if not, how do we recognize the exceptional cases? Can we always infer from the extension of one concept’s coinciding with that of a second, that every object which falls under the first concept also falls under the second? These are the questions,” Frege notes, “raised by Mr Russell’s communication” (1903, 127). Because of these worries, Frege eventually felt forced to abandon many of his views about logic and mathematics. Even so, as Russell points out, Frege met the news of the paradox with remarkable fortitude: Of course, Russell too was concerned about the consequences of the contradiction. Upon learning that Frege agreed with him about the significance of the result, he immediately began writing an appendix for his own soon-to-be-released Principles of Mathematics. Entitled “Appendix B: The Doctrine of Types,” the appendix represents Russell’s first attempt at providing a principled method for avoiding what soon was to become known as “Russell’s paradox.”