 The sense data theory was very popular, perhaps the orthodox view in  the philosophy of perception, in the early twentieth century. The  theory was advanced by Russell (1912); Broad (1925); Price (1950);  and Ayer (1956). Moore (1953, pp. 40–44) described the theory as  “the accepted view,” though he neither endorsed nor  rejected the theory himself. (Though Moore uses the term “sense data,” he does not suppose that what he calls “sense  data” must be mental.) Since the mid-twentieth century, the  view's popularity greatly declined, though several philosophers have  continued to defend it (Jackson 1977; Robinson 1994; Casullo 1987;  Garcia-Carpintero 2001; O'Shaughnessy 2003). Why has this theory been popular? A variety of arguments have been  given for recognizing sense data: Perspectival variation is the kind of variation in one's sensory experiences that normally attends changes in one's spatial or other physical relationship to the physical objects one is observing. Perspectival variation, in this sense, is ubiquitous. For instance, suppose you are viewing a table. If you move closer to or farther from the table, your sensory experience changes. If you move laterally relative to the table, your sensory experience will change in another way (Russell 1912 [1997], pp. 8–11). In a famous passage, Hume sought to use this phenomenon to show that what we are immediately aware of in perception cannot be the real, external objects, but must instead be only images in the mind: This argument and others like it are commonly characterized as  versions of “the argument from illusion,” though that  label can be misleading, since the phenomenon Hume appeals to in the  passage above is one of perspectival variation rather than  illusion. In the present article, I distinguish the argument from perspectival variation from the argument from illusion proper;  illusions will be discussed in the following section. Though Hume does not use the term “sense data,” the  mental images for which he contends are what 20th-century  thinkers labeled “sense data.” Here is one way of  understanding Hume's argument: Once we have agreed that the immediate object of awareness is not the real, external object, we are then meant to infer that it must be  some sort of image of the physical object in our minds, which we  perhaps confused with the physical object. As Reid (1983, pp. 178–9) observes, the argument from (1) and (2) to  (3) is invalid, since the first premise speaks of apparent change,  whereas the second premise concerns actual change. There is no  contradiction in maintaining that the external object  appears to change but does not in fact change. The argument could be made logically valid by rendering it like so: Now critics of the argument will charge that premise (4) is false or  question-begging (Austin 1962, p. 30; Jackson 1977, pp. 107-8; Huemer 2001, p. 125) — it is at least as natural to say that the thing we are directly aware of (namely, the physical object) merely appears to change without actually changing. Perhaps this is mistaken, but  Hume has given no independent reason for rejecting this initially  plausible description of the situation. Sense data theorists have  often held it to be intuitively obvious that when we are directly,  perceptually aware of something, that thing must have the properties  that it appears to have (Price 1950, p. 3; Robinson 1994, p. 32;  Martin 2000, pp. 218–19). Opponents of sense data have typically  found this assumption unmotivated; J. L. Austin, the best-known  critic of the argument from illusion and related arguments for sense  data, is a case in point: Austin's point seems to be that, just as a church can merely look like a barn without there being anything that is a  barn, the table that we see in Hume's example may merely  seem to get smaller, without there being anything that  actually gets smaller. Here is an alternate way of making out the argument from perspectival variation: Modifications might be made to this argument to make it more  plausible: the first premise might be put in counterfactual terms,  rather than in terms of actual changes; “direct  awareness” might replace “awareness”; and one might specify more carefully in what respects the properties of experience  must covary with those of the object of awareness. Something like  this argument may be what Hume had in mind, if only implicitly. Critics of this version of the argument may question either premise.  Thomas Reid seems to deny premise (8), arguing that the external  object changes in respect of certain relational properties. For  instance, when one moves farther away from a table, the table's  angular size relative to one's own position decreases, where this is the size of the angle created by connecting the extremities of the table to the point in space from which the table is viewed. Though this property is relational, the relationship involved is a purely physical one, holding between physical things such as the table and the eye, so it might be said that there is no need to introduce mind-dependent sense data as objects of awareness (Reid 1983, pp. 176–8; Huemer 2001, pp. 120–23; Cornman 1975, pp. 58–9). The Argument from Illusion is the best-known and most historically influential argument for the existence of sense data. An illusion is a case in which one perceives an object, but the object is not the way it appears in some respects. For instance, when one views a straight stick half-submerged in water, the stick may appear bent.  Since it is not in fact bent, this is an illusion. Some philosophers have argued that the possibility of such sensory illusions shows that what we are directly aware of in perception is never the real, physical object (Ayer 1963, pp. 3–11). Using the bent-stick illusion as an example, one might argue: A background assumption is that there is only one stick-like thing  that one sees in the example, and that thing is either an actual,  physical stick, or a sense datum of a stick. The argument concludes  that it is not the physical stick, so it must be a sense datum. Step (4) seems plausible, since one can imagine first perceiving the  stick normally, and then moving it into the water. It would be  implausible to maintain that one is seeing the physical stick up to  the moment when it touches the water, at which point the object of  one's awareness suddenly changes to a sense datum. Opponents of sense data object to premise (1) on grounds similar to  those considered in section 2.1: namely, it may be that what one is  directly aware of merely appears bent but is not in fact bent. Sense  data theorists and their opponents, again, disagree over whether an  object of direct awareness must have exactly the features it appears  to have. Having been taken to task by Austin (1962) over the argument from  illusion, A. J. Ayer sought to defend sense data by another argument  (though Ayer seems to think it is the same argument): By “judgements of perception,” Ayer means beliefs about  the physical world that express what we seem to perceive to be the  case; for instance, when I see a chair, I normally make the  “perceptual judgement” that a physical chair is present.  Ayer's central premise seems to be that all such beliefs about the  physical world are fallible; somehow, this is supposed to force the  conclusion that such beliefs are inferential. That, in turn, is  supposed to support the sense data theory. Perhaps Ayer's implicit reasoning is this: Conclusion (5) does not suffice to establish the existence of sense  data, but by ruling out the competing direct realist theory, it would take Ayer a considerable distance towards vindicating the sense data  theory. If beliefs about sense data could plausibly be claimed to be  infallible, and if one assumes a foundationalist epistemology,  beliefs about sense data would be prime candidates for constituting  non-inferential knowledge. This would make sense data very plausible  candidates for objects of direct awareness. Unfortunately, Ayer gives no motivation for premise (2), which is  rejected by most contemporary foundationalists (Audi 1983; Alston  1976; Huemer 2001, pp. 100–101). A hallucination is a case in which one has an experience  qualitatively like perception, but there is no external object that  one is perceiving. For instance, a large dose of LSD might cause me  to have an experience of seeming to see a pink rat on this table,  where there is in reality nothing pink-rat-like. Some believe that the possibility of hallucinations shows that even  normal perception always involves sense data (Robinson 1994, pp.  151–62; Jackson 1977, pp. 50ff.). Imagine two people, Sally and Sam,  each of whom is having an experience of seeming to see a pineapple.  Sally is simply perceiving a pineapple in the normal way. Sam,  however, is having an incredibly realistic hallucination of a  pineapple, induced by brain scientists who have sophisticated  technology for electrically stimulating Sam's brain. And suppose, as  is theoretically possible, that the brain state causally relevant to  Sally's visual experience is the same as the brain state causally  relevant to Sam's visual experience. I will call this brain state B.  Sam would be unable to distinguish his experience from a normal  perception of a pineapple. In this scenario, what is Sam directly aware of? Surely not a  physical pineapple, since no physical pineapple is present. It seems, then, that he must be aware of a mere mental image of a pineapple.  This mental image is caused by brain state B. Now, what about Sally? Sally's brain state was caused in a different  way from Sam's — Sally's was caused by a real pineapple,  whereas Sam's was caused by the brain scientists. But that does not  change the fact that Sally is now in the same brain state as Sam. We  have already said that in Sam, brain state B caused a mental image of a pineapple. Therefore, it seems that if someone else were to have  state B, it would also cause a mental image of a pineapple for them.  Therefore, it seems that Sally must also be having a mental image of  a pineapple, since she is in state B. Therefore, normal perception  involves sense data, just as hallucination does. This argument relies on the principle that, if a causal chain of events leads to some  effect, E, then any series of events that duplicates the last  member of the causal chain will also produce E, regardless of  whether the earlier members of the chain are duplicated. As long as  Sally and Sam get into the same brain state, regardless of how they  got there, both should experience whatever effects result from that  brain state. One way for a critic of sense data to respond to this argument would  be to deny that state B causes Sam to have a mental object of  awareness. According to the intentionalist account of  perception, what Sam has is a mental state that falsely represents  there to be a pineapple. Sally also has a mental state that  represents there to be a pineapple, though in her case the  representation is true. It may be held that Sam's mental state has  no object of awareness since it is entirely false, whereas  Sally's mental state has the physical pineapple as its object of  awareness. Thus, in neither case must we posit a mental object of  awareness, as in the sense data theory (Huemer 2001, pp. 127–8). Hume tells us that one can induce a case of double vision in oneself  by merely pushing on one eye with one's finger. The possibility of  double vision, he believes, shows that the immediate objects of  awareness in perception are not the real, physical objects (Hume  1739, I.IV.ii; see also Broad 1925, pp. 187–8). The intended argument may be something like this: It would be implausible to maintain that one of the two things is a  sense datum while the other is a real object. One reason this would  be implausible is that there seems to be nothing relevantly different between the two things that could make one of them the  “real” object. Therefore, one should conclude that both  of the things one sees are sense data, rather than physical objects. Critics might respond to this argument by claiming that in a case of  double vision, rather than seeing two things, one sees a single thing that merely appears to be in each of two places (Huemer  2001, pp. 130–31). There is always a time delay between any event in the physical world  and our perception of it. This is most stark in the case of distant  stars, which may burn out and yet still be “seen”  thousands of years later, as the light continues to travel the  distance between the star and us. Imagine two individuals, Sally and Sam, who are each looking up at  the night sky and “seeing” — or seeming to see  — qualitatively similar stars. The star responsible for Sally's experience still exists. But the star ultimately responsible for  Sam's experience ceased to exist 1000 years ago. Sam still  “sees” it because the star was over 1000 light years  away. What is Sam directly aware of? Surely not an actual star, since no star presently exists in the place where he is looking. It must be a mere mental image of a star that he is directly aware of. Just as in the case of the argument from hallucination, we can now argue that since Sally is in the same brain state as Sam, she must also be having a mental image of a star. Therefore, sense data are involved in normal perception, even when the physical object responsible for the perception still exists. (Russell 1912 [1997], p. 33; Robinson 1994, pp.  80–84. Ayer [1956, pp. 102–4] discusses the argument without endorsing it.) One might be tempted to say that what Sam sees is light  rays, rather than a sense datum. But if the time gap shows that  Sam does not directly perceive the star, it must also show that Sam  does not directly perceive anything else outside of him either, since there is some time delay, however small, between any  external event and Sam's corresponding sensory experience. Sam's  visual experience as of a star will occur at least slightly later  than the light rays strike his retina. The natural reply for theorists wishing to resist sense data is to  claim that one can “see into the past,” that is, that  one's perceptual experiences may represent past states of affairs, or represent objects as they were at an earlier time (Cornman 1975, pp.  49–50; Huemer 2001, pp. 131–5). Many philosophers have held that the so-called “secondary  qualities” — including such qualities as colors, tastes,  smells, and sounds — do not exist in the external world, and  that we must instead recognize them as properties of sense data.  Consider the case of colors. A sense data theorist might argue: (See Russell 1912 [1997], pp. 8–11; Jackson 1977, pp. 120–37; Robinson 1994, pp. 59–74.) The first premise seems obvious on its face. The second premise may seem unbelievable, but there are several arguments for it. One of these arguments appeals to differences of color perception  among people. Not only color blind people, but even people with  normal vision differ among themselves slightly in how they perceive  the colors of things (Hardin 1988, pp. 79–80; Byrne and Hilbert 1997, pp. 272–4). If colors are really out there, then there would have to  be an answer to the question, Whose color perceptions are right? But  not only is there no way of determining the answer to that; it seems  hard to think of what facts might make one person's color perceptions more correct than another's. A related argument appeals to the  differences of color perception among different species of animals  (on these differences, see Jacobs 1981, chapter 5; Varela et al.  1993). Again, there seems no answer to the question of which species  is right. Another argument appeals to the fact that our experiences of color  are caused by the wavelengths of light that physical objects reflect. Therefore, it seems that if colors belong to physical objects, they  must be reducible to spectral reflectance distributions (as Byrne and Hilbert [1997] claim). However, there is in general no single  spectral reflectance distribution, or even a single continuous range  of spectral reflectance distributions, corresponding to each of the  colors we see. Two objects with very different spectral reflectance  distributions may both appear orange to us in normal lighting  conditions, for example. (This phenomenon is known as  “metamerism.”) Some believe that this fact precludes our  reducing colors to spectral reflectance properties (Hardin 1988, pp.  7, 46–8). Some philosophers hold that colors are dispositions to cause certain  kinds of sensory experiences in us, rather than dispositions to  reflect light in certain ways. But others object that this is not so, because colors ought to be properties that we directly perceive  things to have, whereas we do not perceive things as having  dispositions to cause experiences in us. There is a good deal to be said about color, and a good deal yet to  be resolved. The ultimate acceptability of premise (2) of the above  argument will turn on whether some reductive theory of the nature of  colors is defensible.