 On the most common conception, sense data (singular:  “sense datum”)  have three defining characteristics: Each of those conditions calls for clarification. First, condition (i): Everyone in the philosophy of perception agrees that perception makes us aware of something. Most hold that there is  a distinction between the things perception makes us  directly aware of, and the things it makes us  indirectly aware of, where to be indirectly aware of  something is, roughly, to be aware of it in a way that depends on the awareness of something else. There are at least two ways of further  explicating this notion. One way, adopted by Jackson (1977, pp.  15–20), is to say that we perceive something indirectly if we  perceive it by virtue of perceiving something else. For  example, consider my perception of the table in front of me. I do not perceive all of the table; I can only see its outer surface, and  indeed only the portion of that surface facing me. Yet we still say  that I see the table. I count as seeing the table by virtue  of seeing something else, namely, the facing surface of the  table. Therefore, Jackson would say that I see the table only  indirectly. Sense data, on this view, are things that one may  perceive not by virtue of perceiving anything else. Another way of distinguishing direct and indirect awareness is to  say, roughly, that one has indirect awareness of x when  one's awareness of x is caused by one's awareness of  something else (see Huemer [2001, pp. 55–7] for a more spelled-out  version of this approach). For instance, I might wish to determine  the temperature of a pot of water indirectly, by means of a  thermometer, rather than sticking my hand in the water. In such a  case, I would first become aware of the reading on the thermometer,  and this would cause me to be aware of the temperature of the water.  Thus, my awareness of the water's temperature would be indirect. On  this view, sense data would be things our awareness of which is not  causally dependent on any other awareness. Second, condition (ii): Sense data theorists believe that the things  we are directly aware of in perception are dependent on the mind of  the perceiver — they cannot exist unperceived. Such things have also sometimes been called “mental images,”  “ideas,” “impressions,”  “appearances,” or “percepts.” Third, condition (iii): “The properties that perceptually  appear to us” refers to the qualities we seem to perceive  things around us to have. For instance, if I perceive a tomato, and  it looks red and round to me, then redness and roundness are  properties that perceptually appear to me. According to those who  believe in sense data, there is in this case a thing that I am  directly aware of, which is both red and round, and which  depends on my mind for its existence. Condition (iii) holds true even if I am subject to a sensory illusion or hallucination. Thus, if the  tomato is really green, but, due to some sort of color illusion, it  looks red to me, then my sense datum is red, not green.  Furthermore, if there is no tomato present in reality, but I am  hallucinating a tomato, then I will be having a tomato-like sense  datum. Those who accept sense data believe that sense data exist whenever a  person perceives anything, by any of the senses, and also whenever a  person has an experience qualitatively like perceiving, such as a hallucination. So construed, the sense data theory contrasts with two competing  schools of thought in the philosophy of perception. First, direct realism holds that in perception, we are directly aware of  physical phenomena and only physical phenomena — for example, a table, or a portion of a table's surface. Direct realists thus deny  that there is anything satisfying both conditions (i) and (ii) above, and therefore deny that there are sense data. Direct realism itself  comes in at least two varieties: a disjunctivist variety  (McDowell 1994; Dancy 1995) and an intentionalist variety  (Armstrong 1961; Searle 1983; Huemer 2001). Second, the adverbial theory, in one version, holds that in  perception, we are directly aware of a certain kind of mental state  or occurrence, but that this mental state does not actually possess  the properties that appear to us (Chisholm 1977, pp. 29–30).  Adverbialists have been known to characterize this mental state in  such terms as “being appeared to redly.” When a person is in the mental state of being appeared to redly, say the  adverbialists, it does not follow that anything is actually  red. Thus, adverbialists deny that there is anything  satisfying all of conditions (i), (ii), and (iii), and therefore deny that there are sense data. Those who accept sense data believe that sense data exist whenever a  person perceives anything, by any of the senses, and also whenever a  person has an experience qualitatively like perceiving, such as a hallucination. The term “sense data” has not always been used in the sense described above. Indeed, when the term was first introduced by early 20th-century philosophers such as H. H. Price, G. E. Moore, and Bertrand Russell, it was intended only to denote that which we are directly aware of in perception. The term's meaning was supposed to be neutral between direct and indirect realist theories of perception, so that it was not to be assumed either that sense data must by definition be mind-dependent or that they must be mind-independent (Russell 1912 [1997], p. 12; Moore 1953, p. 30). Thus, G.E.  Moore debated with himself, inconclusively, about whether “sense data” were or were not typically parts of the surfaces of physical objects. Broad (1925) thought sense data were neither mental nor physical. And more recently, Bermúdez (2000) has defended what he calls a sense data theory, according to which the surfaces of visually perceived physical objects are “sense data.” However, those who have used the term “sense data” have  so frequently concluded that what we are directly aware of in  perception is, in fact, dependent on the mind that the term is now  usually understood to import an assumption of mind-dependence. Sense data theorists have also differed over exactly how to describe  the mind's relation to its sense data. Most sense data theorists have said that we perceive sense data or, in the case of visual  sense data, that we literally see them (Jackson 1977; Ayer  1958; O'Shaughnessy 2003). Others say only that we are aware  of, are acquainted with, or simply sense sense data (Robinson 1994; Price 1950, pp. 3–4), perhaps with the thought  that the terms “perceive”, “see,” and the  like should be reserved for our relation to the physical objects that cause our sense data. In the remainder of this article, sense data are understood in the  sense articulated in section 1.1, and the Sense Data Theory is  understood simply as the theory that there are such things, that is,  that in perception one is directly aware of mind-dependent things  that have the properties that perceptually appear to us.