 The sense data theory has been subjected to at least four main kinds  of objection. One reason the sense data theory has lost favor is no doubt the  ascendance of physicalism in the philosophy of mind.  Physicalists believe that the world is entirely physical; in  particular, they believe that mental states either do not exist or  are reducible to physical states, such as brain states. Physicalism  is contrasted with dualism, which holds that mental  states/events are distinct from physical states/events. For various reasons, most contemporary thinkers in philosophy of mind embrace some form of physicalism and reject dualism. If they are  right to do so, then there is a reason for rejecting sense data:  namely, that sense data do not seem to fit into the physicalist  picture (Martin [2000, p. 222] discusses but does not endorse this  line of thought). Sense data are supposed to have the properties that perceptually  appear to us. But, in cases of normal perception, the only  physical things that have the properties that perceptually  appear to us are the external objects that the direct realists say we are perceiving; and in cases of illusions and hallucinations, there  are no physical things that have the properties that perceptually  appear to us. In particular, our brain states manifestly do not  ordinarily have the properties that perceptually appear to us (except in the odd case that we happen to be looking at a brain). So sense  data, if they exist, must be non-physical things. O'Shaughnessy (2003, p. 186) seeks to avoid this consequence by  distinguishing the place where a sense-datum is from the  place where it “is given experientially to us”.  Presumably he would draw a similar distinction for other properties  of the sense-datum. His view seems to be that sense data might be  identical with brain states, so that the sense data one experiences  would in fact have the properties, such as shape, location, and  perhaps color, of one's brain states, even though they are given  experientially as having different and incompatible sets of  properties. O'Shaughnessy does not explain what it is for a thing to  be given experientially as having a property, but he seems to be  abandoning the traditional doctrine that sense data literally have  the features that perceptually appear to us. A more perspicuous response to the argument from physicalism is to  simply embrace mind-body dualism (Jackson 1982). At least three sorts of epistemological objections to the sense data  theory have been raised. The first and most common charge is that the sense data theory leaves us vulnerable to external world skepticism.  If we are only ever directly aware of our own sense data and other  nonphysical phenomena, it is said, then it is unclear what reason we  have for believing anything physical exists. Sense data theorists  will generally admit that it is logically possible that someone  should have exactly the same sense data that I, for example, have,  and yet for there to be no physical objects around that person of the kind that I take myself to be surrounded by. Berkeley (1710, section  20) famously took this point to show that I have no good reason for  believing in such physical objects. However, as Jackson (1977, pp.  141–2) observes, the point really shows only that we cannot validly  deduce the existence of physical things from facts about our sense data; it remains open that we might infer the existence of  physical things non-demonstratively. To rule this out, one may appeal to Hume's (1758, XII.1) skeptical argument, according to which all  non-demonstrative reasoning proceeds by induction, and all inductive  reasoning consists in generalizing from past experience. On this  view, in order to non-demonstratively infer any conclusion about  physical objects, one must first have past experience of physical  objects from which one might draw generalizations. If, as the sense  data theory holds, one's immediate experience only ever concerns  sense data, then one's inductive inferences can only draw  generalizations about sense data. Sense data theorists can respond to this skeptical challenge by proposing that our beliefs about the physical world are justified by inference to the best explanation (Jackson 1977, pp. 142–5; Russell 1912 [1997], pp. 22–4). Consider an analogy: we know of the existence of molecules, despite never having directly observed a molecule, because the theory that posits molecules provides the best explanation for certain other things we know about the behavior of macroscopic bodies. Similarly, perhaps we know of the existence of physical objects in general, despite never having directly observed one, because the theory that posits physical objects provides the best explanation for other things that we know about the behavior of sense data. A second broadly epistemological objection claims that the sense data theorist cannot account for our having the concept of physical  objects, or for our ability to conceive of the properties of physical objects. This is because, according to the sense data theory,  physical objects in principle cannot be directly observed in the way  sense data can. Thus, while a sense datum may, for example, be red  and round, all physical objects are invisible (they cannot  be seen). It makes no sense to say that a color resembles something  that is invisible, and similar arguments could be made for all other  observable properties besides color; therefore, physical objects  cannot in principle resemble sense data. Since we are supposedly  never directly aware of physical objects or their properties, and  they cannot resemble the things we are directly aware of, it is  argued that we could have no conception of the nature of physical  objects (Berkeley 1710, sections 8–10; Searle 1983, pp. 59–60). Sense data theorists will reply first by denying that on their view  physical objects are “invisible.” Rather, their view is  that what it is to see a physical object is to have a sense  datum representing that object, so physical objects are, on their  view, often seen (O'Shaughnessy 2003, pp. 175, 178–9). Second, the  objection of the preceding paragraph gains undeserved plausibility  from the use of the word “resemble.” The statement that A resembles B may be taken to mean that A looks like B. Sense  data theorists are not committed to claiming that sense data look like physical objects. They are, however, committed to claiming  that sense data have at least some of the properties that  physical objects typically have. In particular, most sense data  theorists will agree that physical objects, like sense data, have  shapes, though they will typically deny that physical objects have  colors or other secondary qualities (Locke 1689, II.viii; Jackson  1977, 120–37). Pace Berkeley, it is not unintelligible to speak of an object one is directly aware of having the same shape as an object  one cannot be directly aware of. No one thinks, for example, that  because an individual H2O molecule cannot be seen, it is  therefore unintelligible to speak of the molecule's shape. A third epistemological objection derives from Wilfrid Sellars  (2000), who questions the traditional account of foundational  empirical knowledge (knowledge that comes immediately from  experience). The epistemological view traditionally taken by sense  data theorists has been roughly along these lines (Russell 1912): The first epistemological objection discussed above questions step  (d). Sellars, however, questions step (c). He poses a dilemma for  sense data theorists: either the immediate awareness of a sense datum mentioned in (b) and (c) is propositional in form (that is,  it is the awareness that the sense datum has F, where F is some  property), or it is non-propositional. If the awareness is  propositional, says Sellars, then it requires the application of  concepts. For instance, to be aware that a sense datum is red, one  must first have the concept of redness. This is problematic, because it is generally thought that perceptual awareness ought to  precede and be independent of concepts. On the other hand, if the  awareness in step (b) is non-propositional, then it cannot give one  the knowledge posited in step (c), because that knowledge is propositional — it involves the knowledge that one's sense  datum is of a certain kind — and a non-propositional state  cannot support a proposition (Sellars 2000, part I). One reply on behalf of the sense data theorist is to note that  Sellars' dilemma is not particularly directed at the sense data  theory, despite that Sellars formulates it in those terms. That is,  if Sellars' argument is compelling, a version of it would apply  equally well to direct realist, idealist, or adverbial theories of  perception. Sellars' real objection is to the idea of any  form of direct awareness providing us with knowledge, whether it be  awareness of sense data, physical objects, states of being appeared  to, or anything else. Sellars' intended solution to the problem seems to lie in the direction of a coherence theory of justification. But  it is unclear why a sense data theorist could not equally appeal to  considerations of coherence, despite that historically all or most  sense data theorists have in fact been foundationalists. A second reply, on behalf of the sense data foundationalist, is that  Sellars has confused propositional awareness with conceptual  awareness. One might enjoy an immediate awareness of a sense datum as having a certain specific shade of color for which one has no  preexisting concept. The awareness would thus be non-conceptual but  propositional: one is aware of the fact that a is  F, where a is the sense datum and F is the unconceptualized property one senses it as having (Huemer [2001, pp.  71–7] takes a similar line, but adapted to a direct realist view). If sense data have the properties that perceptually appear to us,  then among other things, visual sense data have sizes and shapes. If  so, then they occupy space. It is therefore fair to ask where in  space they are located. But there does not seem to be any plausible  answer to this (Huemer 2001, pp. 149–68). A further objection to both answers (2) and (3) is that they conflict with the special theory of relativity, since in some cases, they  would require one's brain state to cause a sense datum to appear  outside one's forward light cone, and the theory of relativity  precludes causal relations with events so situated. As we have noted, sense data are supposed to have precisely the  properties that are presented to us in perceptual experience. If one  has an experience of seeming to see something red, then one's sense  datum is red; equally importantly, if one is not having an  experience of seeming to see something red, then one does  not have a red sense datum. A problem with this is raised by the observation that it is sometimes indeterminate what properties objects appear to us to have. To say  that it is indeterminate what properties an object appears to have is to say that the object appears to instantiate some  determinable, but there is no specific determinate  falling under that determinable that it appears to instantiate. For  example, an object might appear to fall within a certain range of  colors, while there is no exact shade of color that it appears to  have. Chisholm (1942) discusses a case in which one sees a speckled  hen for a moment, but one is unable to say how many speckles one saw. Ayer (1963, pp. 124–5) implies that in such a case, there is no  definite number of speckles that the sense datum had. Other, perhaps  more convincing pieces of evidence for indeterminate appearances  include our inability to say exactly how far away certain objects  seem to be, our inability in some cases to say merely on the basis of appearances whether two objects are the same color, and our inability to read blurred or far-away words. Hardin (1985) discusses  psychological experiments that seem to demonstrate indeterminacy of  color and shape appearances: in some cases, subjects can visually  detect the existence of an object without being able to make out any  apparent color, can detect motion without awareness of the shape or  color of the moving object, and so on. If the apparent properties of objects of perception are sometimes  indeterminate, then the sense data involved would have to be  metaphysically indeterminate — that is, they would have to  actually lack definite characteristics. This, however, is logically  impossible — an object cannot be speckled but have no  particular number of spots; an object cannot be colored but have no  particular shade of color; and so on. This sort of problem only  arises when, as sense data theorists do, one analyzes appearance in  such a way that there must always be an actual object that has all  and only the properties that appear to the subject (Huemer 2001, pp.  168–73; Armstrong 1993, pp. 218–21). A related problem is raised by cases of inconsistent appearances, as  in the case of the waterfall illusion. This is an illusion in which  objects appear, at each moment during an extended time interval, to  be moving, yet they never change their positions in the visual field. The sense data theory would seem to demand sense data with  inconsistent properties in such a case (Hardin 1985, p. 489). Sense data theorists may respond to these problems by denying, pace  Ayer, that sense data have exactly the properties they appear to  have. It is unclear how much of the original motivation for  introducing “sense data” remains after the idea has been  thus revised.