 The rise of naturalized epistemology as a movement within analytic philosophy in the second half of the 20th Century has largely sidelined the rationalist style of approach. From the naturalistic perspective, philosophy is conceived of as continuous with science, and not as having some independently privileged status. The perspective of the naturalistic philosopher may be broader, but her concerns and methods are not fundamentally different from those of the scientist. The conclusion is that science neither needs—nor can legitimately be given—external philosophical justification. It is against this broadly naturalistic background that some philosophers have sought to provide an epistemic justification of simplicity principles, and in particular principles of ontological parsimony such as Occam's Razor. The main empirical evidence bearing on this issue consists of the patterns of acceptance and rejection of competing theories by working scientists. Einstein's development of Special Relativity—and its impact on the hypothesis of the existence of the electromagnetic ether—is one of the episodes most often cited (by both philosophers and scientists) as an example of Occam's Razor in action (see Sober 1981, p. 153). The ether is by hypothesis a fixed medium and reference frame for the propagation of light (and other electromagnetic waves). The Special Theory of Relativity includes the radical postulate that the speed of a light ray through a vacuum is constant relative to an observer no matter what the state of motion of the observer. Given this assumption, the notion of a universal reference frame is incoherent. Hence Special Relativity implies that the ether does not exist. This episode can be viewed as the replacement of an empirically adequate theory (the Lorentz-Poincaré theory) by a more ontologically parsimonious alternative (Special Relativity). Hence it is often taken to be an example of Occam's Razor in action. The problem with using this example as evidence for Occam's Razor is that Special Relativity (SR) has several other theoretical advantages over the Lorentz-Poincaré (LP) theory in addition to being more ontologically parsimonious. Firstly, SR is a simpler and more unified theory than LP, since in order to ‘save the phenomena’ a number of ad hoc and physically unmotivated patches had been added to LP. Secondly, LP raises doubts about the physical meaning of distance measurements. According to LP, a rod moving with velocity, v, contracts by a factor of (1 − v2/c2)1/2. Thus only distance measurements that are made in a frame at rest relative to the ether are valid without modification by a correction factor. However, LP also implies that motion relative to the ether is in principle undetectable. So how is distance to be measured? In other words, the issue here is complicated by the fact that—according to LP—the ether is not just an extra piece of ontology but an undetectable extra piece. Given these advantages of SR over LP, it seems clear that the ether example is not merely a case of ontological parsimony making up for an otherwise inferior theory. A genuine test-case for Occam's Razor must involve an ontologically parsimonious theory which is not clearly superior to its rivals in other respects. An instructive example is the following historical episode from biogeography, a scientific subdiscipline which originated towards the end of the 18th Century, and whose central purpose was to explain the geographical distribution of plant and animal  species.[13]  In 1761, the French naturalist Buffon proposed the following law; There were also known exceptions to Buffon's Law, for example remote islands which share (so-called) ‘cosmopolitan’ species with continental regions a large distance away. Two rival theories were developed to explain Buffon's Law and its occasional exceptions. According to the first theory, due to Darwin and Wallace, both facts can be explained by the combined effects of two causal mechanisms—dispersal, and evolution by natural selection. The explanation for Buffon's Law is as follows. Species gradually migrate into new areas, a process which Darwin calls “dispersal.” As natural selection acts over time on the contingent initial distribution of species in different areas, completely distinct species eventually evolve. The existence of cosmopolitan species is explained by “improbable dispersal,” Darwin's term for dispersal across seemingly impenetrable barriers by “occasional means of transport” such as ocean currents, winds, and floating ice. Cosmopolitan species are explained as the result of improbable dispersal in the relatively recent past. In the 1950's, Croizat proposed an alternative to the Darwin-Wallace theory which rejects their presupposition of geographical stability. Croizat argues that tectonic change, not dispersal, is the principal causal mechanism which underlies Buffon's Law. Forces such as continental drift, the submerging of ocean floors, and the formation of mountain ranges have acted within the time frame of evolutionary history to create natural barriers between species where at previous times there were none. Croizat's theory was the sophisticated culmination of a theoretical tradition which stretched back to the late 17th Century. Followers of this so-called “extensionist” tradition had postulated the existence of ancient land bridges to account for anomalies in the geographical distribution of plants and  animals.[14] Extensionist theories are clearly less ontologically parsimonious than Dispersal Theories, since the former are committed to extra entities such as land bridges or movable tectonic plates. Moreover, Extensionist theories were (given the evidence then available) not manifestly superior in other respects. Darwin was an early critic of Extensionist theories, arguing that they went beyond the “legitimate deductions of science.” Another critic of Extensionist theories pointed to their “dependence on ad hoc hypotheses, such as land bridges and continental extensions of vast extent, to meet each new distributional anomaly” (Fichman 1977, p. 62) The debate over the more parsimonious Dispersal theories centered on whether the mechanism of dispersal is sufficient on its own to explain the known facts about species distribution, without postulating any extra geographical or tectonic entities. The criticisms leveled at the Extensionist and Dispersal theories follow a pattern that is characteristic of situations in which one theory is more ontologically parsimonious than its rivals. In such situations the debate is typically over whether the extra ontology is really necessary in order to explain the observed phenomena. The less parsimonious theories are condemned for profligacy, and lack of direct evidential support. The more parsimonious theories are condemned for their inadequacy to explain the observed facts. This illustrates a recurring theme in discussions of simplicity—both inside and outside philosophy—namely, how the correct balance between simplicity and goodness of fit ought to be struck. This theme takes center stage in the statistical approaches to simplicity discussed in Section 5. Less work has been done on describing episodes in science where elegance—as opposed to parsimony—has been (or may have been) the crucial factor. This may just reflect the fact that considerations linked to elegance are so pervasive in scientific theory choice as to be unremarkable as a topic for special study. A notable exception to this general neglect is the area of celestial mechanics, where the transition from Ptolemy to Copernicus to Kepler to Newton is an oft-cited example of simplicity considerations in action, and a case study which makes much more sense when seen through the lens of elegance rather than of  parsimony.[15] Naturalism depends on a number of presuppositions which are open to debate. But even if these presuppositions are granted, the naturalistic project of looking to science for methodological guidance within philosophy faces a major difficulty, namely how to ‘read off’ from actual scientific practice what the underlying methodological principles are supposed to be. Burgess, for example, argues that what the patterns of scientific behavior show is not a concern with multiplying entities per se, but a concern more specifically with multiplying ‘causal mechanisms’ (Burgess 1998). And Sober considers the debate in psychology over psychological egoism versus motivational pluralism, arguing that the former theory postulates fewer types of ultimate desire but a larger number of causal beliefs, and hence that comparing the parsimony of these two theories depends on what is counted and how (Sober 2001, pp. 14–5). Some of the concerns raised in Sections 1 and 2 also reappear in this context; for example, how the world is sliced up into kinds effects the extent to which a given theory ‘multiplies’ kinds of entity. Justifying a particular way of slicing becomes more difficult once the epistemological naturalist leaves behind the a priori, metaphysical presuppositions of the rationalist approach. One philosophical debate where these worries over naturalism become particularly acute is the issue of the application of parsimony principles to abstract objects. The scientific data is—in an important sense—ambiguous. Applications of Occam's Razor in science are always to concrete, causally efficacious entities, whether land-bridges, unicorns, or the luminiferous ether. Perhaps scientists apply an unrestricted version of Occam's Razor to that portion of reality in which they are interested, namely the concrete, causal, spatiotemporal world. Or perhaps scientists apply a ‘concretized’ version of Occam's Razor unrestrictedly. Which is the case? The answer determines which general philosophical principle we end up with: ought we to avoid the multiplication of objects of whatever kind, or merely the multiplication of concrete objects? The distinction here is crucial for a number of central philosophical debates. Unrestricted Occam's Razor favors monism over dualism, and nominalism over platonism. By contrast, ‘concretized’ Occam's Razor has no bearing on these debates, since the extra entities in each case are not concrete.