 The two approaches discussed in Sections 3 and 4—a priori rationalism and naturalized empiricism—are both in some sense extreme. Simplicity principles are taken either to have no empirical grounding, or to have solely empirical grounding. Perhaps as a result, both these approaches yield vague answers to certain key questions about simplicity. In particular, neither seems equipped to answer how exactly simplicity ought to be balanced against empirical adequacy. Simple but wildly inaccurate theories are not hard to come up with. Nor are accurate theories which are highly complex. But how much accuracy should be sacrificed for a gain in simplicity? The black-and-white boundaries of the rationalism/empiricism divide may not provide appropriate tools for analyzing this question. In response, philosophers have recently turned to the mathematical framework of probability theory and statistics, hoping in the process to combine sensitivity to actual practice with the ‘trans-empirical’ strength of mathematics. Philosophically influential early work in this direction was done by Jeffreys and by Popper, both of whom tried to analyze simplicity in probabilistic terms. Jeffreys argued that “the simpler laws have the greater prior probability,” and went on to provide an operational measure of simplicity, according to which the prior probability of a law is 2−k, where k = order + degree + absolute values of the coefficients, when the law is expressed as a differential equation (Jeffreys 1961, p. 47). A generalization of Jeffreys' approach is to look not at specific equations, but at families of equations. For example, one might compare the family, LIN, of linear equations (of the form y = a + bx) with the family, PAR, of parabolic equations (of the form y = a + bx + cx2). Since PAR is of higher degree than LIN, Jeffreys' proposal assigns higher probability to LIN. Laws of this form are intuitively simpler (in the sense of being more elegant). Popper (1959) points out that Jeffreys' proposal, as it stands, contradicts the axioms of probability. Every member of LIN is also a member of PAR, where the coefficient, c, is set to 0. Hence ‘Law, L, is a member of LIN’ entails ‘Law, L, is a member of PAR.’ Jeffreys' approach assigns higher probability to the former than the latter. But it follows from the axioms of probability that when A entails B, the probability of B is greater than or equal to the probability of A. Popper argues, in contrast to Jeffreys, that LIN has lower prior probability than PAR. Hence LIN is—in Popper's sense—more falsifiable, and hence should be preferred as the default hypothesis. One response to Popper's objection is to amend Jeffrey's proposal and restrict members of PAR to equations where c ≠ 0. More recent work on the issue of simplicity has borrowed tools from statistics as well as from probability theory. It should be noted that the literature on this topic tends to use the terms ‘simplicity’ and ‘parsimony’ more-or-less interchangeably (see Sober 2003). But, whichever term is preferred, there is general agreement among those working in this area that simplicity is to be cashed out in terms of the number of free (or ‘adjustable’) parameters of competing hypotheses. Thus the focus here is totally at the level of theory. Philosophers who have made important contributions to this approach include Forster and Sober (1994) and Lange (1995). The standard case in the statistical literature on parsimony concerns  curve-fitting.[16]  We imagine a situation in which we have a set of discrete data points and are looking for the curve (i.e. function) which has generated them. The issue of what family of curves the answer belongs in (e.g. in LIN or in PAR) is often referred to as model-selection. The basic idea is that there are two competing criteria for model selection—parsimony and goodness of fit. The possibility of measurement error and ‘noise’ in the data means that the correct curve may not go through every data point. Indeed, if goodness of fit were the only criterion then there would be a danger of ‘overfitting’ the model to accidental discrepancies unrepresentative of the broader regularity. Parsimony acts as a counterbalance to such overfitting, since a curve passing through every data point is likely to be very convoluted and hence have many adjusted parameters. If proponents of the statistical approach are in general agreement that simplicity should be cashed out in terms of number of parameters, there is less unanimity over what the goal of simplicity principles ought to be. This is partly because the goal is often not made explicit. (An analogous issue arises in the case of Occam's Razor. ‘Entities are not to be multiplied beyond necessity.’ But necessity for what, exactly?) Forster distinguishes two potential goals of model selection, namely probable truth and predictive accuracy, and claims that these are importantly distinct (Forster 2001, p. 95). Forster argues that predictive accuracy tends to be what scientists care about most. They care less about the probability of an hypothesis being exactly right than they do about it having a high degree of accuracy. One reason for investigating statistical approaches to simplicity is a dissatisfaction with the vagaries of the a priori and naturalistic approaches. Statisticians have come up with a variety of numerically specific proposals for the trade-off between simplicity and goodness of fit. However, these alternative proposals disagree about the ‘cost’ associated with more complex hypotheses. Two leading contenders in the recent literature on model selection are the Akaike Information Criterion [AIC] and the Bayesian Information Criterion [BIC]. AIC directs theorists to choose the model with the highest value of {log L(Θk)/n} − k/n, where Θk is the best-fitting member of the class of curves of polynomial degree k, log L is log-likelihood, and n is the sample size. By contrast, BIC maximizes the value of {log L(Θk)/n} − klog[n]/2n. In effect, BIC gives an extra positive weighting to simplicity by a factor of log[n]/2 (where n is the size of the  sample).[17] Extreme answers to the trade-off problem seem to be obviously inadequate. Always picking the model with the best fit to the data, regardless of its complexity, faces the prospect (mentioned earlier) of ‘overfitting’ error and noise in the data. Always picking the simplest model, regardless of its fit to the data, cuts the model free from any link to observation or experiment. Forster associates the ‘Always Complex’ and the ‘Always Simple’ rule with empiricism and rationalism  respectively.[18]  All the candidate rules that are seriously discussed by statisticians fall in between these two extremes. Yet they differ in their answers over how much weight to give simplicity in its trade-off against goodness of fit. In addition to AIC and BIC, other rules include Neyman-Pearson hypothesis testing, and the minimum description length (MDL) criterion. There are at least three possible responses to the varying answers to the trade-off problem provided by different criteria. One response, favored by Forster and by Sober, is to argue that there is no genuine conflict here because the different criteria have different aims. Thus AIC and BIC might both be optimal criteria, if AIC is aiming to maximize predictive accuracy whereas BIC is aiming to maximize probable truth. Another difference that may influence the choice of criterion is whether the goal of the model is to extrapolate beyond given data or interpolate between known data points. A second response, typically favored by statisticians, is to argue that the conflict is genuine but that it has the potential to be resolved by analyzing (using both mathematical and empirical methods) which criterion performs best over the widest class of possible situations. A third, more pessimistic, response is to argue that the conflict is genuine but is unresolvable. Kuhn (1977) takes this line, claiming that how much weight individual scientists give a particular theoretical virtue, such as simplicity, is solely a matter of taste, and is not open to rational resolution. McAllister (2007) draws ontological morals from a similar conclusion, arguing that sets of data typically exhibit multiple patterns, and that different patterns may be highlighted by different quantitative techniques. Aside from this issue of conflicting criteria, there are other problems with the statistical approach to simplicity. One problem, which afflicts any approach emphasizing the elegance aspect of simplicity, is language relativity. Crudely put, hypotheses which are syntactically very complex in one language may be syntactically very simple in another. The traditional philosophical illustration of this problem is Goodman's ‘grue’ challenge to induction. Are statistical approaches to the measurement of simplicity similarly language relative, and—if so—what justifies choosing one language over another? It turns out that the statistical approach has the resources to at least partially deflect the charge of language relativity. Borrowing techniques from information theory, it can be shown that certain syntactic measures of simplicity are asymptotically independent of choice of measurement  language.[19] A second problem for the statistical approach is whether it can account not only for our preference for small numbers over large numbers (when it comes to picking values for coefficients or exponents in model equations), but also our preference for whole numbers and simple fractions over other values. In Gregor Mendel's original experiments on the hybridization of garden peas, he crossed pea varieties with different specific traits, such as tall versus short or green seeds versus yellow seeds, and then self-pollinated the hybrids for one or more  generations.[20]  In each case one trait was present in all the first-generation hybrids, but both traits were present in subsequent generations. Across his experiments with seven different such traits, the ratio of dominant trait to recessive trait averaged 2.98 : 1. On this basis, Mendel hypothesized that the true ratio is 3 : 1. This ‘rounding’ was made prior to the formulation of any explanatory model, hence it cannot have been driven by any theory-specific consideration. This raises two related questions. First, in what sense is the 3 : 1 ratio hypothesis simpler than the 2.98 : 1 ratio hypothesis? Second, can this choice be justified within the framework of the statistical approach to simplicity? The more general worry lying behind these questions is whether the statistical approach, in defining simplicity in terms of number of adjustable parameters, is replacing the broad issue of simplicity with a more narrowly—and perhaps arbitrarily—defined set of issues. A third problem with the statistical approach concerns whether it can shed any light on the specific issue of ontological parsimony. At first glance, one might think that the postulation of extra entities can be attacked on probabilistic grounds. For example, quantum mechanics together with the postulation ‘There exist unicorns’ is less probable than quantum mechanics alone, since the former logically entails the latter. However, as Sober has pointed out, it is important here to distinguish between agnostic Occam's Razor and atheistic Occam's Razor. Atheistic OR directs theorists to claim that unicorns do not exist, in the absence of any compelling evidence in their favor. And there is no relation of logical entailment between {QM + there exist unicorns} and {QM + there do not exist unicorns}. This also links back to the terminological issue. Models involving circular orbits are more parsimonious—in the statisticians' sense of ‘parsimonious’—than models involving elliptical orbits, but the latter models do not postulate the existence of any more things in the world.