 So far, we have looked at reasons for and against the two premises of the CP argument for Cartesian Skepticism. A different kind of approach to the argument requires some setup. Philosophers routinely distinguish between sentences and the propositions expressed by some of them. Sentences are language-dependent entities whereas propositions are (something like) the informational content of some of those language-dependent entities (see entry on  propositions).  Thus, we distinguish between the proposition that it is raining and the English sentence It is raining. That very same proposition can be expressed by other sentences, such as the Spanish sentence Está lloviendo. Moreover, which proposition a given sentence expresses (if any) can depend on contextual factors—that is to say, the same sentence may express one proposition when produced in a given a context, and a different one when produced in a different context. Thus, when Tomás says that it is raining he expresses the proposition that it is raining in Tucson on May 14, 2019, whereas when Manolo said “Está lloviendo” last week, he expressed the proposition that it was raining in Mar del Plata on May 10, 2019. The contextualist response to the argument for Cartesian Skepticism rests on the claim that which propositions the sentences used in that argument express is also a context-sensitive matter. Different contextualists would fill in the details in different ways—here we follow most closely the contextualism of Cohen 1987, 1988, 2000, 2005, 2014a,b, but see also Lewis 1996, DeRose 1992, 1995, 2002, 2004, 2005 and Stine 1976. Notice, to begin with, that justification comes in degrees: one can be more justified in believing one proposition than another. But there is also such a thing as being justified tout court. In this respect, it can be argued that “justified” is like “tall”, in that we can make sense both of comparative uses, such as when we say that Tomás is taller than his mother, and of non-comparative ones, such as when we say that Jordan is tall. Notice also that which proposition is expressed by a non-comparative use of “tall” does not float free from what would be appropriate comparative uses. Thus, when I say “Jordan is tall”, what I say is true provided that Jordan is taller than the average subject in the relevant contrast class. Thus, if Jordan is a fifth-grader, then what I said would be true if Jordan is taller than the average fifth-grader, whereas if Jordan is an NBA player, then what I said would be true if Jordan is taller than the average NBA player (who plays in Jordan’s position, perhaps). Similarly, the contextualist claims that when I say that I am justified in believing a proposition, what I say is true if and only if my degree of justification for believing the proposition is higher than a contextually set threshold. That threshold, moreover, can vary with the conversational context. Thus, if we are doing epistemology and thinking about the requirements for justification, the threshold required for an utterance of “I am justified in believing I have hands” goes up to the point where few (if any) of us would count as having said something true, whereas in an everyday context the threshold goes down to the point where most of us would count as having said something true. According to contextualism, then, there is no single proposition expressed by the sentences used in the CP-based argument for Cartesian Skepticism. Rather, there are many such propositions. Two interesting ones are the propositions expressed in everyday contexts, where CP2 as well as the conclusion of the argument express false propositions, and those expressed in heightened-scrutiny contexts, where both CP2 as well as the conclusion of the argument express true propositions. CP1 (as well as CP itself) always expresses a true proposition, as long as we do not change contexts mid-sentence. Thus, the contextualist response to the CP-based argument is that it is at least two arguments: a sound one, when produced in heightened-scrutiny contexts, and one with a false premise (and a false conclusion) when produced in ordinary contexts. Contextualism is thus a more concessive response to the skeptic than the ones we have canvassed so far, for it concedes that the sentences used in the argument for Cartesian Skepticism can be used to express propositions which constitute a sound argument. But even though Contextualism represents a concessive answer to skepticism, it is certainly not concessive enough in the eyes of the skeptic. For the contextualist simply asserts that, in ordinary contexts, we are justified in rejecting skeptical hypotheses. But recall that the skeptic’s idea was that CP2 is true even when we have in mind even minimally demanding standards for justification. In other words, the skeptic claims that we are not justified in believing the negation of skeptical hypotheses even a little bit, not just that we do not meet a very stringent standard for justification. Now, the skeptic might well be wrong about this, but the contextualist, qua contextualist, does not have any argument for his trademark claim that we do have some justification for believing the negation of skeptical hypotheses. In this respect, contextualism as a response to the skeptic is parasitic on some independent argument to the effect that we do have that kind of justification. A related issue regarding Contextualism pertains to its relevance to skepticism. Grant, if only for the sake of argument, that Contextualism regarding knowledge and justification attributions is true. That is to say, grant that there are multiple properties that, say, “justified” could refer to. Couldn’t skeptics, and epistemologists more generally, be interested in a subset (perhaps just one) of them? If so, the interesting epistemological arguments would pertain to the conditions under which that property is instantiated, and Contextualism would fall by the wayside. For a debate regarding this and related issues, see Conee 2014a,b and Cohen 2014a,b. A view which is related to, but crucially different from, Contextualism goes under various names in the literature: “Subject-Sensitive Invariantism”, “Interest Relative Invariantism” or views which admit of “pragmatic encroachment” (see Fantl and McGrath 2002, 2007, 2009; Hawthorne 2003; and Stanley 2005). Whereas the contextualist thinks that the same sentence attributing justification can express different propositions depending on the context in which it is produced, the subject-sensitive invariantist thinks that the proposition expressed is invariant, but its truth-value depends on features of the subject which can vary (such as how important it is to the subject that the belief in question be true). Very roughly, a version of subject-sensitive invariantism has it that a sentence of the form “S is justified in believing p” invariantly expresses a proposition which entails that S’s justification for believing p is at least high enough for S to be rational in acting as if p is true. Notice that whether it is rational for S to act as if p is traditionally thought to depend on two things: the degree of justification S has for believing that p (or, perhaps more commonly in the context of decision theory, which degree of belief, or credence, S is justified in assigning to p), and S’s preferences. Thus, the more sensitive S’s preferences are with respect to whether p is true, the more justified in believing p S must be for the proposition that S is justified (tout court) in believing p to be true. For instance, if nothing much hangs, for S, on whether there is orange juice in the house, a faint memory of having seen some in the fridge might be enough for it to be true that S is justified in believing that there is orange juice in the house. On the other hand, if S is diabetic and needs to ingest some sugar quickly, that same faint memory might not be enough for that same proposition to be true. Notice the difference between Contextualism and Subject-Sensitive Invariantism: the contextualist might say that the same sentence (that S is justified in believing that there is orange juice in the house) expresses two different propositions (one true, the other false) depending on whether the conversational context includes the information that S is diabetic and needs to ingest sugar; the subject-sensitive invariantist, on the other hand, holds that the sentence in question always expresses the same proposition, but that very proposition is true in the first case but false in the second. Subject-Sensitive Invariantism has been subject to a number of criticisms (see McGrath 2004; DeRose 2002, 2004, 2005; Cohen 2005; Comesaña 2013; Anderson and Hawthorne, 2019a,b), but the general approach has also been ably defended (see the previously cited work by Fantl and McGrath). Nevertheless, the same issue that arose with respect to Contextualism seems to arise here. The Subject-Sensitive Invariantist needs an independent argument to the effect that we can be justified at least to a minimal degree in believing the negations of skeptical hypotheses, for otherwise his trademark claim that propositions attributing us justification for believing such claims are true is itself unjustified.