 Thoughts can be the contents of propositional attitudes. When one says “There are three things that everyone who works on elementary physics believes”, one quantifies over things that everyone working in elementary physics believes: thoughts (see Chisholm 1970: 19). Thoughts are also truth-value bearers (“There are three truths that everyone who works in elementary physics believes”). How are thoughts related to states of affairs? For instance, how is the thought that Socrates is wise related to the state of affairs  Socrates’ being wise? Prima facie, thoughts are one thing, states of affairs another. Thoughts and states of affairs differ in their individuation and existence conditions. Individuation-conditions: Thoughts are supposed to be the contents of propositional attitudes like belief and desire. Let “j” be shorthand for a propositional attitude verb (“desire”, “believe” etc). If one can j that p without eo ipso j-ing that q (and vice versa), the contents that p and that q are different. Now I can believe, for instance, that Hesperus shines without believing that Phosphorus shines. Hence, if thoughts are the contents of propositional attitudes, the thought that Hesperus shines is different from the thought that Phosphorus shines. If the thought that Hesperus shines is different from the thought that Phosphorus shines, thoughts cannot be logical complexes whose constituents are particulars and properties. Following Frege, many philosophers therefore take thoughts to be complexes that are built up out of modes of presentations. Here “thoughts” only refers to such complexes. Since there are different modes of presentations of the same particular (property), there can be different thoughts that concern or are about the same particulars and properties. In contrast, Hesperus’s shining and Phosphorus’s shining are the same state of affairs, namely the complex that contains only the planet Venus and the property of shining. We will see in  section 2.4  that not all philosophers follow Frege’s lead. If one has arguments for a coarse-grained individuation of the objects of belief, states of affairs may serve as contents of propositional attitudes. Existence-conditions: A thought is a complex whose constituents are modes of presentation that purport to represent objects. Standard accounts of modes of presentation allow for the existence of modes of presentations that are empty. Hence, the existence of a thought does not depend on the existence of the objects it purports to represent. For example, the thought that Pegasus is a horse exists, although there is no such horse (for defense and elaboration see Sainsbury 2005: 86–9). This is different for states of affairs. If a state of affairs is a complex that contains objects and properties as constituents, it cannot exist if its constituents don’t exist. So while it is true that Pegasus does not exist, there is no such state of affairs. This is unproblematic for we have not been given any reason to think that such a state of affairs obtains or does not obtain. For the same reason states of affairs that contain contingently existing objects are themselves contingent existents. Philosophers often use the notion of a singular proposition. A singular proposition is supposed to be (i) “directly about” an object and (ii) evaluable as true or false. Direct aboutness requires that what the proposition is directly about exists if the proposition exists. If one combines (i) and (ii) with the plausible assumption that the proposition that Superman does not exist is singular and true, one arrives at the conclusion that Superman exists. Similar problems arise for negative modal existential singular propositions such as the proposition that Socrates might not have existed. Williamson 2002 argues on the basis of these problems that everything exists necessarily. Williamson’s modus ponens is Plantinga’s (1983) and Merricks’s 2015 (chapt. 5) modus tollens: singular propositions can exist although the object they are directly about doesn’t. If one sides with Plantinga and Merricks, one can drive a wedge between truth and obtaining. We are not compelled to hold that there is a state of affairs Superman’s non-existing because we have no reason to say that such a state of affairs obtains or even possibly obtains, while we have a reason to say that it is true that Superman does not exist. Hence, the (singular) proposition that Superman does not exist can be true without the state of affairs Superman’s non-existing obtaining. Obtaining is indeed only truth-like. Chisholm held that propositions are those states of affairs such that either the state of affairs or its negation always occurs (on Chisholm’s notion of state of affairs, see Kim 1979). But, as we have seen, the truth that Superman does not exist cannot be the state of affairs Superman’s non-existing occurring or obtaining. Reinach (1911: 339) claimed that “states of affairs, and only states of affairs, can adopt such modalities” as probability and possibility. He had in mind that an object such as a die cannot be possible or probable. This seems plausible enough. It is equally plausible that facts are not probable or possible. However, why can’t thoughts be probable or possible? Forbes (1989: 130–131) refines Reinach’s idea in taking states of affairs as the fundamental bearers of modal properties like being possible, necessary etc. From Reinach we learn that particulars can’t be the bearers of modality. Fregean truth-values are also unsuited. According to Frege’s semantics for assertoric sentences, every true (false) sentence, whether necessary or contingently true, refers to the True (the False). Forbes appeals to our modal intuitions to argue for a better candidate for the modal value bearer role, a category of entity not so finely discriminated as thoughts but more finely discriminated than truth-values, such that sentences with the same entity in the category as their references are guaranteed to have the same modal status. (1989: 130) Let us consider a pair of sentences to illustrate Forbes’s argument for an entity less discriminating than thoughts and more discriminating than truth-values. Consider the sentence pairs: (1a) to (2b) are all true. Hence, in Fregean terms, they all refer to the True. Each of these sentences expresses a thought different from all others. However, the members of each pair have the same modal status that differs from the modal status of the members of the other pair. (1a) and (1b) are contingently true; (2a) and (2b) necessarily true. If one lets sentences stand for or describe state of affairs whose constituents are the referents of the semantically relevant sentence parts, one can capture this similarity: (1a) and (1b) ((2a) and (2b)) have the same modal status because these sentences stand for the same state of affairs (Forbes 1989: 131). In general, sentences that stand for the same state of affairs have the same modal value. It is then a short step to take states of affairs to be the primary or fundamental bearers of modal status (1989: 131–2). A sentence is contingently (necessarily) true if, and only if, it stands for a state of affairs that contingently (necessarily)  obtains.[2] Can’t facts be the basic bearers of modal status? Take a further sentence pair: (3a) and (3b) are false, they express different thoughts, yet have the same modal status: they might have been true. This similarity cannot be explained by taking them to refer to the same fact; we need states of affairs. We can now answer our initial question: Yes, we need states of affairs as well as thoughts. States of affairs and thoughts have distinct individuation and existence conditions. Therefore, states of affairs can be the fundamental bearers of modal properties. We can strengthen the conclusion by considering ways to dispute it. Consider all thoughts that represent the same particulars and predicate the same properties of them. Let us call these thoughts referentially equivalent. Vendler proposed that a fact is “an abstract entity which indiscriminately contains a set of referentially equivalent true propositions” (Vendler 1967: 711; my emphasis). If we drop the restriction to true propositions and simplify Vendler’s idea, we can propose that a state of affairs is a set of referentially equivalent thoughts, whether they are true or not. The state of affairs Hesperus’s shining is the set of all thoughts that are about Hesperus and predicate the property of shining to it. However, such an approach to states of affairs makes them explanatorily uninteresting. If we want to explain why (1a) and (1b) ((2a)–(2b)/(3a)–(3b)) have the same modal profile, appealing to states of affairs in Vendler’s sense does not allow us to make progress. For instance, saying that (1a) and (1b) have the same modal profile because they belong to the set of thoughts that are about Hesperus and predicate the property of shining to it is at best a partial explanation. For it raises such questions as “What has belonging to this set to do with possibility?” and “In virtue of which property has a set of thoughts modal properties”? In contrast, the assumption that there are states of affairs (and not just a particular kind of set) and that they have properties like being possible or being probable can be independently motivated and is explanatory progress. In  section 2.2  we used the modal properties of states of affairs to distinguish them from thoughts. Some philosophers have proposed to use the connection between states of affairs and modality constructively to explain what a possible world is. Lewis (1973: 84) points out that we talk about ways things might have been. He goes on to label ways every thing might have been “possible worlds”. If it is possible that something is the case, there is a possible world in which it is the case. What are, then, possible worlds? Van Inwagen distinguished between Abstractionist and Concretist conceptions of possible worlds (see van Inwagen 1986: 185–6; see also Stalnaker 1986: 121). According to a Concretist conception of possible worlds such as David Lewis’s, a possible world is the maximal mereological sum of individuals that are spatio-temporally related and each such sum is spatio-temporally isolated from all others (see Lewis 1986: 69–70). There are no impossible worlds. The actual world is the world in which we are located. According to Abstractionists, possible worlds are abstract objects of some sort. The exercise in probability calculation from  section 1.2  motivates an Abstractionist proposal in which states of affairs are the basic building blocks. States of affairs are possible outcomes. Kripke called possible outcomes “miniature possible worlds”. This suggests an idea of what a possible world is: it is a maximal state of affairs. Pollock (1984a: 57) defines possible world therefore as follows: A state of affairs w includes a state of affairs S if, and only if, necessarily if w obtains, S obtains. The actual world is the possible maximal nontransient state of affairs that obtains. A state of affairs is transient if, and only if, it obtains at one time and not another. For instance, the state of affairs Socrates’s not drinking hemlock obtains at some times, but not at others. Transient states of affairs are only possible, actual etc.  relative to a time. Before 399 BC it was possible that Socrates does not drink hemlock, but this is no longer possible after 399 BC. A state of affairs is nontransient if, and only, if it is such that necessarily if it obtains at one time it obtains at all times. For example, the state of affairs Socrates’s being hungry on the 15th of April 400 BC at 16:15 is nontransient. (PW) makes use of modal concepts to define possible world: it must be possible for S and w to both obtain etc. Hence, this particular Abstractionist conception of possible worlds does not allow one to explain modality away; it presupposes it. In contrast, the Concretist conception promises a definitional reduction of modal concepts. When we talk about possibility and necessity we quantify over mereological sums of things. The concept of modality is not required to distinguish between possible and impossible worlds: there are no impossible ones. Why is (PW), then, attractive? First, Forbes (1987: 139ff) argues that the identification of possible worlds with constructions out of compossible states of affairs solves the problem of accidental intrinsics (Lewis 1986: 199–201). Let us consider an intrinsic property of a human being, say me, such as having two hands. I might have existed without having had two hands. On the concretist account this implies that there is a possible world in which I have a different number of hands. But how can one and the same individual have two as well as less/more hands “in different worlds”? If the worlds are mereological sums that have me as a common part, this seems not possible. Lewis concludes that the same object cannot be part of different possible worlds. An object can only be in different possible worlds by having counterparts in them. According to counterpart theory, I might have had three hands only in the derived sense by having counter-parts that have three hands (see Kripke 1980: 45). This does not sit well with the intuition that I strictly and literally speaking might have had three hands. The identification of possible worlds with constructions out of compossible states of affairs is faithful to this intuition. I have different properties in different possible worlds, if the possible worlds contain different states of affairs that involve me. One possible world contains the state of affairs MT’s having three hands; the possible world that is actual contains the state of affairs MT’s having two hands. The different possible worlds under discussion don’t overlap, yet the possibilities involve me (see Forbes 1987: 141). Second, the semantics of counterfactuals. The so-called “Stalnaker-Lewis semantics” for counterfactuals assumes that a counterfactual such as “If it were rainy today, I would take an umbrella” is true if, and only if, all of the closest possible worlds in which the antecedent is true are possible worlds in which the consequent is true. This semantics for counterfactuals allows the substitution of logically equivalent sentences in the antecedent of a counterfactual. For example, if the counterfactual “If it were rainy today, I would take an umbrella” is true, so is “If it were rainy and windy today or rainy and not windy today, I would take an umbrella” because “It is rainy today” and “If it is rainy and windy today or rainy and not windy today” are true in the same possible worlds. Fine (1975: 453f; 2012: 230f) argues that the substitution principle should be given up in the light of puzzling consequences. But certainly one can substitute some sentences in the antecedent of a counterfactual. Which ones? Fine suggests replacing Stalnaker-Lewis semantics for counterfactuals with a semantics in which possible states take pride of place. Instead of a plurality of possible worlds there is a space of possible states that involve particulars and ways they can be. Assertoric sentences refer to states of affairs and only those sentences that refer to the same state of affairs can be substituted in the antecedent of a counter-factual (Fine 1975: 454). Fine assumes that “It is rainy”, “It is rainy and windy” and “It is rainy and not windy” etc. refer to different states of affairs (1975: 454). How can this assumption be justified? If we take the idea that states of affairs are complexes seriously, we can answer this question. Just like other complexes they can (at least in part) be individuated in terms of their constituents. The states of affairs \(S_1\) and \(S_2\) can therefore only be the same state of affairs if they have the same constituents. This conception allows for states of affairs that necessarily co-obtain, but differ. For example, necessarily, the state of affairs that triangle A is equilateral obtains if the state of affairs that triangle A is equiangular and vice versa. Similarly, the state of affairs P necessarily obtains if, and only if, the state of affairs \(P \mathbin{\&} (Q \lor \neg Q)\) obtains. Yet, these are different states of affairs: they have different constituents. This conception of states of affairs as complexes makes them useful for semantics. If sentences refer to such states of affairs, logically equivalent sentences can refer to different states of affairs and therefore have different semantic properties. All tautologies are true in all possible worlds, yet they can refer to different states of affairs. A number of semantic theories assume that sentences refer to states of affairs. These theories provide principles that determine the reference of complex sentences on the basis of their parts (see Fine 2012: 234; see also Rumfitt 2015: 160–7). However, if states of affairs are individuated in terms of their components and their mode of combination, there are for every possible world many different maximal nontransient states of affairs (for the following see Zalta 1993: 393–4). If the state of affairs P is a possible world, so is \(P \mathbin{\&} (Q\lor \neg Q)\) for an arbitrarily chosen possible state of affairs Q. P and \(P \mathbin{\&} (Q\lor \neg Q)\) are necessarily equivalent, but, according to our individuation method, different states of affairs. Hence, there are many different maximal states of affairs that correspond to the same possible world and, in particular, to the actual world. Zalta (1993) tackles this problem on the basis of his axiomatic theory of abstract objects. According to him, abstract objects like numbers exemplify but also encode properties. For example, 1 encodes the properties that are essential to its identity; to its being the object it is. In contrast, 1 exemplifies, but does not encode, the property of being the number of inhabited planets of the solar system. In this system, situations are those abstract objects that encode state of affairs properties such as being such that John is to the left of Harry. If a situation is the case, the state of affairs properties it encodes obtain; the situation makes the encoded state of affairs property factual. A situation S is a possible world if, and only if, it is possible that S makes all and only the obtaining states of affairs properties factual. On the basis of the axioms of his system Zalta can show that there is a unique actual world. If one is unwilling to make a distinction between encoding and exemplifying, but one wants to maintain the identification of possible worlds with maximal possible states of affairs, one either has to accept that necessarily equivalent states of affairs are the same or one must identify possible worlds with sets of necessarily equivalent possible states of affairs. We already rejected the first option as unfruitful for semantics. The second option seems to result in a set-theoretic modeling or replacement of possible worlds, not in a conception of possible worlds (see Zalta 1993: 394). Thoughts can’t fulfill the role of states of affairs as the fundamental bearers of modal properties. Can states of affairs be the contents of propositional attitudes? Prima facie, the answer is No. We have already seen that states of affairs are too coarse-grained to be the contents of propositional attitudes. I can believe that Hesperus is a planet, without believing that Phosphorus is a planet (and vice versa). Hence, the contents of the attitudes differ. But the state of affairs Hesperus’s being a planet is just the state of affairs Phosphorus’s being a planet. Propositional attitudes are, at best, mediated relations to states of affairs. For example, a belief represents a state of affairs if, and only if, the believer assents to a thought that describes a state of affairs. Barcan Marcus has challenged this view. She argued that belief is “a relation between a subject or agent and a state of affairs that is not necessarily actual but that has actual objects as its constituents” (Barcan Marcus 1993 [1990]: 240). Her object-centered account of belief identifies belief with a differential disposition to a state of affairs: x believes that S just in case, under certain agent-centered circumstances including x’s desires and needs as well as external circumstances, x is disposed to act as if S, that actual or nonactual state of affairs, obtains. (Barcan Marcus 1993 [1990]: 241) Believing that so-and-so does not require concept possession. For example, believing that the sun is shining is a differential disposition to the state of affairs the sun’s shining, however described or presented. The object-centered account of belief contrasts with mode-of-presentation-centered or language-centered accounts. The object-centered theory allows us to take belief-ascriptions to non-linguistic creatures to be literally true. However, it runs into problems when it comes to assertoric utterances of sentences containing empty singular terms. According to the object-centred view, these don’t express beliefs (see Barcan Marcus 1993 [1990]: 247). While the state of affairs a’s being F can exist, although a is not F; it cannot exist, if either a or being F doesn’t exist. Now take the belief that Napoleon was French. I satisfy all intuitive criteria for the possession of this belief. Imagine that we find out that, after all, there was never such a person as Napoleon. It was all a very elaborate hoax. Then there is no state of affairs composed of Napoleon and being French. Hence, although all intuitive criteria may have told us that I believed that Napoleon was French, we now find out that I never had that belief. This is counter-intuitive and artificial. To sum up: Thoughts and states of affairs are different things. Thoughts cannot be reduced to states of affairs and the reduction of states of affairs to sets of referentially equivalent thoughts is unwarranted. We need both thoughts and states of affairs in order to fulfill different roles.