 Bertrand Russell, to whom many current structured propositions theorists attribute the idea of structured propositions, held various views about the nature of propositions over the course of his career. However, the account of propositions held by Russell that is thought by many to be the progenitor of current accounts of structured propositions is the one Russell defended in Russell [1903]. We shall confine our attention to that account here. Russell differed with Frege both on what the constituents of structured propositions are and on what binds them together in the proposition. Russell uses the word ‘term’ for constituents of propositions. Thus he writes: Thus we already see that Russell differs from Frege on what kinds of things can be constituents of propositions. For Frege, all constituents of propositions are senses. For Russell, a man or a mountain can be a constituent of a proposition. In a now famous correspondence with Frege, Russell replied to Frege’s assertion that the sense of the name ‘Mont Blanc’, and not Mont Blanc itself “with all its snowfields”, occurs in the proposition/thought that Mont Blanc is 4,000 meters high, by saying: Russell goes on to distinguish two kinds of terms or propositional constituents: So for Russell, all propositional constituents are things or concepts. On Russell’s view, a sentence such as: Socrates is human expresses a proposition with three constituents, corresponding to the three words in the sentence. Socrates himself is one of the constituents, the other two constituents being the concepts contributed by ‘is’ and ‘human’. Having seen that Russell held different kinds of things to be constituents of propositions than did Frege, we shall turn to his views on what binds together the constituents of structured propositions. Russell appears to hold that the propositional contributions of verbs (which contributions Russell often calls verbs) hold together the constituents of propositions. Thus he writes: And later Russell writes: Russell’s idea that a proposition is something beyond the sum of its constituents certainly seems correct. The collection, or mereological sum, of A, difference and B is not the proposition that A differs from B. Different propositions may have the same Russellian constituents, as with the propositions expressed by the following sentence pair: Jason loves Patti. Patti loves Jason. However, Russell’s idea that the propositional contribution of the verb binds the constituents together (in different ways in the case of our pair of sentences) is hard to understand. In the next to last quotation from Russell above, he suggests that the proposition expressed by ‘A differs from B’, whose constituents are A, difference and B, is held together by difference actually obtaining between A and B. If we call difference a relation, the proposition would consist of A standing in the relation of difference to B. Russell makes a number of remarks that suggest that this is his view. But it would seem that this cannot be correct. Intuitively, A standing in the relation of difference to B is what makes the proposition that A differs from B true. It is not the proposition itself. For if it were, it would seem that if A doesn’t stand in the difference relation to B, then there is no (false) proposition to the effect that A differs from B. And quite generally, for the same reason it would appear that there are no false propositions. Perhaps Russell meant that propositional contributions of verbs hold propositional constituents together in some other manner. But it certainly is not clear what that manner would be. Or perhaps he held a view similar to Zalta’s discussed above.