 Many (perhaps all) mental states are about things or are directed on to things in the way that a belief that spring is coming is about spring coming or in the way that a desire for chocolate is directed on to chocolate. The philosopher Franz Brentano (1838–1917) spoke of such mental states as involving presentations of the objects of our thoughts. The idea was that we couldn't desire chocolate unless chocolate was in some way presented to our minds. Nowadays, we would say that chocolate must be represented in our minds if it is chocolate that we desire. Teleological theories of content, like other theories of mental content, attempt to solve what is often referred to as Brentano's problem: the problem of explaining intentionality, explaining how mental states can be about things or be directed on to things in this way. One version of the problem, often attributed to Brentano but perhaps more correctly attributed to Roderick Chisholm (1957), concerns thoughts about non-existent objects. Chisholm argued that the aboutness (or intentionality) of mental states can not be a physical relation between a mental state and what it is about (its object) because in a physical relation each of the relata must exist whereas the objects of mental states might not exist. If Andrew kisses Kate both Andrew and Kate must exist and if the sun shines on a garden both the sun and the garden must exist too. In contrast, Billy can love Santa and search for unicorns even if Santa does not exist and there are no unicorns. Chisholm concluded that it is hard to see how intentionality can be a physical phenomenon, but those who offer teleological theories almost always adopt a physicalist framework to try to explain how intentionality is possible. They aim at what is often called a “naturalistic theory”: “naturalistic” because the aim is to give a theory that is consistent with the claim that the fundamental furniture of the universe is nothing but what the natural sciences describe.  Within that framework, it is a working hypothesis that intentionality is not ontologically fundamental, so most teleological theories try to show that intentionality is part of the natural world by showing how it can be understood in terms of other natural things. In effect, those who propose teleological theories of mental content try to say why a mental representation, R, represents what it represents, C, by filling in the blank in, “R has the content C because (in virtue of) _______”, without making ineliminable use of intentional terms. It also needs to account for the normative nature of mental representation. Content is said to be normative because it legitimates certain evaluations. We evaluate beliefs as true or false, memories as accurate or inaccurate, perceptions as veridical or illusory and so on. We also evaluate desires as satisfied or not satisfied and motor instructions as correctly or incorrectly executed. Content that is normative is sometimes described as truth-evaluable. Representational states count as true or false (etc.) by virtue of their content as well as the state of the world. For example, the truth of my belief that today is sunny depends on whether it is sunny but it also depends on its being a belief that today is sunny. If the content of the belief were different (e.g., if it were the belief that today is hot) its truth value might be different. The normative nature of content poses a problem for naturalistic theories but those who propose teleological theories of mental content think that this problem is tractable. Much attention is paid to the possibility of misrepresentation. This is because the distinction between correct and incorrect representation is often regarded as a central normative distinction and because a capacity to misrepresent is often thought to be essential for representing: no possibility of misrepresentation, no representing. Consider a mental representation of a cat. If it is to have the content cat, so that all and only cats are in its extension, it must be that if it were used to label a non-cat (e.g., a dog) it would count as misrepresenting it. However, there may be exceptions to the general rule that all representations can misrepresent (e.g., a representation that has the content something or nothing). Misrepresentation is also not possible in every kind of mental context (e.g., in dreaming and, perhaps, desiring). The possibility of misrepresentation also connects with Chisholm's concern with non-existent objects because a capacity to misrepresent amounts to a basic capacity to represent non-existent objects. Imagine a simple detection device that normally goes into a RED-state in response to red. If the RED-state has the content there is red then, if RED could be tokened sometimes when nothing red is present, a token RED could represent a non-existent instantiation of red. There is more to explaining our capacity to represent non-existent objects than explaining how misrepresentation is possible but explaining how misrepresentation is possible is a start. Misrepresentation makes it clear that representing is often a three-place relation. Suppose, for example, that I see some crumpled newspaper blown by the wind as a cat slinking down the street. There are at least three things involved. First, there is the representation (or representational vehicle) that has the content. In us, it is presumably some sort of neurological state or event.  Here, such mental representations are denoted by capitalized English expressions (e.g., CAT). Second, there is the thing that the representation is aimed at representing, in this case this is the newspaper. Cummins (1996) calls this the target of the representation. And third, there is the content of the representation. Since I represent the newspaper as a cat, the content of the representation in this case is cat. Misrepresentation has occurred in this case because the target of the representation is not in the extension of the representation; the newspaper is not a cat. We can ask questions about each of these three places in the representation relation. First is the question of representational status: Why does CAT count as a representation? Or, more generally, what is the difference between natural states that are representational states and natural states that are not? Second is the question of target determination: What makes it the case that this token of CAT has the newspaper as its target? Or, more generally, what makes anything the target of any given representation? Third is the question of content determination: What makes it the case that CAT has the content cat? Or, more generally, in virtue of what does any representation have the content that it has? Teleological theories of mental content are primarily concerned with content determination, but a complete solution to Brentano's problem will need to give answers to all three. A distinction is sometimes made between representation of and representation as. Whether or not teleological theories of content are concerned with representation as or of depends on how those locutions are used. In one sense, referring back to the previous example, my CAT-representation represents the newspaper as a cat, although it is a representation of the newspaper. On this way of speaking, teleological theories of content are theories of representation as. However, the words “as” and “of” are not always diagnostic of the contents/targets distinction. For example, we can also say that I used a representation of a cat to represent the newspaper. The teleological theories that are currently on offer are generally theories of referential content (not theories of cognitive content or mode of presentation). Many philosophers would agree that referential content, which is normative in the aforementioned sense, is not narrow content. By definition, two individuals who are physical replicas at time t “from the skin in” must have the same narrow-content states at t. Proponents of teleological theories do not believe that referential content is narrow. This view is also shared by other philosophers who think that referential content supervenes (in part) on things that are external to individual thinkers, such as on features of their social and physical environment and/or their history (for the kinds of reasons raised by Putnam (1975) and Burge (1979, 1986)). In general, the proponents of teleological theories of content have shown little interest in the notion of narrow content, since they tend to reject the claim that cognitive science should restrict itself to using narrow notions. Still, a teleological theory of mental content could be combined with the view that cognitive science needs a narrow notion of content. A teleological theory of content tries to explain the nature of psycho-semantic norms (i.e., semantic norms insofar as they apply to mental representations). It is to some extent a separate question whether such norms play a role in cognitive science and whether a narrow notion is needed instead or in addition. A further point about broad aims is that teleological theories of mental content are not usually intended as theories about how we grasp meanings or are conscious of them. To grasp a meaning is plausibly a sophisticated intentional state that involves representations of meanings and not just representations with meanings. To understand how we grasp meanings, we might turn to psychological theories of concept possession and introspective access to conceptual structures. Such theories presuppose that there are representations with content, whereas teleological theories of mental content try to explain the nature of intentionality at its most fundamental; they aim to say how we can, to begin with, have any representations with content. A final point about broad aims is that teleological theories of mental content are usually intended as real nature theories. These theories do not try to describe the criteria that we use in everyday life to identify the beliefs and desires of people, the criteria used in folk psychological intentional ascriptions (though Price (2001) is an exception). Those who offer real nature theories of mental content think that our everyday ability to recognize intentional states does not make us experts on the fundamental nature of intentional states, any more than our everyday ability to recognize water makes us experts on the fundamental nature of water. The idea is that we can recognize instances of a kind on the basis of the superficial appearances of things of the kind, while remaining ignorant of their essential nature.  So, most teleological theories of mental content do not entail that, if Bill thinks that Mavis knows that today is Tuesday then Bill must be thinking about the teleological functions of Mavis's representation producing or using systems.