 Different interpretations of the equivalence schema yield different  versions of deflationism. One important question concerns the issue of what instances of the  equivalence schema are assumed to be about (equivalently: to what the names in instances of the equivalence schema are assumed to refer).  According to one view, instances of the equivalence schema are about  sentences, where a name for a sentence can be formulated simply by  quoting the sentence — thus "‘Brutus killed  Caesar’" is a name for ‘Brutus killed Caesar’. In  other words, for those who hold what might be called a  sententialist version of deflationism the equivalence schema has instances like (3): To make this explicit, we might say that, according to sententialism, the equivalence schema is (ES-sent): Notice that in this schema, the angle-brackets of (ES) have been  replaced by quotation marks. According to those who hold what might be called a  propositionalist version of deflationism, by contrast,  instances of the equivalence schema are about propositions, where  names of propositions are, or can be taken to be, expressions of the  form ‘the proposition that p’ — thus,  ‘the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar’ is a name for the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar. For the propositionalist,  in other words, instances of the equivalence schema are properly  interpreted not as being about sentences but about propositions,  i.e., more like (4) than (3): To make this explicit, we might say that, according to  propositionalism, the equivalence schema is (ES-prop): To interpret the equivalence schema as (ES-sent) rather than  (ES-prop), or vice versa, is to yield a different deflationary theory of truth. Hence sententialism and propositionalism are different  versions of deflationism. (There are also some further ways to  interpret the equivalence schema, but we shall set them aside here.) The other dimension along which deflationary theories vary concerns  the nature of the equivalence that the theories interpret instances  of the equivalence schema as asserting. On one view, the right hand  side and the left hand side of such instances are analytically  equivalent. Thus, for sententialists, (3) asserts that,  "‘Brutus killed Caesar’ is true" means the same as  ‘Brutus killed Caesar’; while for propositionalists (4)  asserts that ‘the proposition that Brutus killed Caesar is  true’ means the same as ‘Brutus killed Caesar’. A  second view is that the right hand side and the left hand side of  claims such as (3) and (4) are only materially equivalent; this view  interprets the ‘if and only if’ in both (3) and (4) as  the biconditional of classical logic. And a third view is that claims such as (3) and (4) assert a necessary equivalence between their  right hand sides and their left hand sides; that is, both (3) and (4) are to be interpreted as material biconditionals that hold of  necessity. This tripartite distinction between analytic, necessary, and material equivalence, when combined with the distinction between sententialism and propositionalism, yields six different versions of deflationism: It is this variegated nature of deflationism that to a large extent  dictates the many names that have been used for the theory. The  labels ‘redundancy theory’, ‘disappearance  theory’ and ‘no-truth theory’ have been used mainly to apply to analytic versions of deflationism: positions  A or B. The label  ‘disquotational theory’ tends to apply to sententialist  versions, and in fact to material sentential deflationism: position  C. The label ‘minimalist theory’ is a  label used recently by Paul Horwich (1998b) to apply to necessary  versions, and in fact to necessary propositional deflationism:  position F. It will not be important for us to  examine all of these versions of deflationism in detail; to a large  extent philosophers prefer one or other versions of these views on  the basis of views from other parts of philosophy, views about the  philosophy of language and metaphysics. However, it will be  convenient here to settle on one version of the view. We will  therefore follow Horwich in concentrating mainly on position  F. Horwich calls this view ‘minimalism’, but we will continue simply with ‘deflationism’.