 The deflationary theory has been one of the most popular approaches  to truth in the twentieth century, having received explicit defense  by Frege, Ramsey, Ayer, and Quine, as well as sympathetic treatment  from many others. (According to Dummett 1959, the view originates  with Frege.) The following passages all contain recognizable versions of the doctrine, though they differ on points of detail. It is worthy of notice that the sentence ‘I smell the scent of violets’ has the same content as the sentence ‘it is true that I smell the scent of violets’. So it seems, then, that nothing is added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth. (Frege 1918) Truth and falsity are ascribed primarily to propositions. The  proposition to which they are ascribed may be either explicitly given or described. Suppose first that it is explicitly given; then it is  evident that ‘It is true that Caesar was murdered’ means  no more than that Caesar was murdered, and ‘It is false that  Caesar was murdered’ means no more than Caesar was not  murdered. They are phrases which we sometimes use for emphasis or  stylistic reasons, or to indicate the position occupied by the  statement in our argument….In the second case in which the  proposition is described and not given explicitly we have perhaps  more of a problem, for we get statements from which we cannot in  ordinary language eliminate the words ‘true’ or  ‘false’. Thus if I say ‘He is always right’,  I mean that the propositions he asserts are always true, and there  does not seem to be any way of expressing this without using the word ‘true’. But suppose we put it thus ‘For all  p, if he asserts p, p is true’, then we see that the propositional function p is true is simply  the same as p, as e.g. its value ‘Caesar was murdered  is true’ is the same as ‘Caesar was murdered’.  (Ramsey 1927) …it is evident that a sentence of the form "p is  true" or "it is true that p" the reference to truth never  adds anything to the sense. If I say that it is true that Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, or that the proposition "Shakespeare wrote  Hamlet" is true, I am saying no more than that Shakespeare  wrote Hamlet. Similarly, if I say that it is false that  Shakespeare wrote the Iliad, I am saying no more than that  Shakespeare did not write the Iliad. And this shows that the words ‘true’ and ‘false’ are not used to  stand for anything, but function in the sentence merely as assertion  and negation signs. That is to say, truth and falsehood are not  genuine concepts. Consequently there can be no logical problem  concerning the nature of truth. (Ayer 1935). The truth predicate is a reminder that, despite a technical ascent to talk of sentences, our eye is on the world. This cancellatory force of the truth predicate is explicit in Tarski's paradigm: Quotation marks make all the difference between talking about words  and talking about snow. The quotation is a name of a sentence that  contains a name, namely ‘snow’, of snow. By calling the  sentence true, we call snow white. The truth predicate is a device  for disquotation. (Quine 1970). In addition to being popular historically, the deflationary theory has been the focus of much recent work. Perhaps its most vociferous contemporary defenders are Hartry Field and Paul Horwich. One reason for the popularity of deflationism is its  anti-metaphysical stance. Deflationism seems to deflate a grand  metaphysical puzzle, a puzzle about the nature of truth, and much of  modern philosophy is marked by a profound scepticism of metaphysics.  Another reason for the popularity of deflationism concerns the fact  that truth is a semantic notion, and therefore takes its place along  with other semantic notions, such as reference, meaning, and content. Many philosophers are concerned with trying to understand these  semantic notions. The deflationary theory is attractive since it  suggests that, at least in the case of truth, there is less to be  puzzled about here than one might expect.