 Naturalism  is a movement that seeks to ground philosophical theorizing in the scientific enterprise. As so often in philosophy, different authors use the term “naturalism” in different ways. Usage within philosophy of mind typically connotes an effort to depict mental states and processes as denizens of the physical world, with no irreducibly mental entities or properties allowed. In the modern era, philosophers have often recruited LOTH to advance naturalism. Indeed, LOTH’s supposed contribution to naturalism is frequently cited as a significant consideration in its favor. One example is Fodor’s use of CCTM+FSC to explain semantic coherence. The other main example turns upon the problem of intentionality. How does intentionality arise? How do mental states come to be about anything, or to have semantic properties? Brentano (1874 [1973: 97]) maintained that intentionality is a hallmark of the mental as opposed to the physical: “The reference to something as an object is a distinguishing characteristic of all mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything similar”. In response, contemporary naturalists seek to naturalize intentionality. They want to explain in naturalistically acceptable terms what makes it the case that mental states have semantic properties. In effect, the goal is to reduce the intentional to the non-intentional. Beginning in the 1980s, philosophers have offered various proposals about how to naturalize intentionality. Most proposals emphasize causal or nomic links between mind and world (Aydede & Güzeldere 2005; Dretske 1981; Fodor 1987, 1990; Stalnaker 1984), sometimes also invoking teleological factors (Millikan 1984, 1993; Neander 2017l; Papineau 1987; Dretske 1988) or historical lineages of mental states (Devitt 1995; Field 2001). Another approach, functional role semantics, emphasizes the functional role of a mental state: the cluster of causal or inferential relations that the state bears to other mental states. The idea is that meaning emerges at least partly through these causal and inferential relations. Some functional role theories cite causal relations to the external world (Block 1987; Loar 1982), and others do not (Cummins 1989). Even the best developed attempts at naturalizing intentionality, such as Fodor’s (1990) version of the nomic strategy, face serious problems that no one knows how to solve (M. Greenberg 2014; Loewer 1997). Partly for that reason, the flurry of naturalizing attempts abated in the 2000s. Burge (2010: 298) reckons that the naturalizing project is not promising and that current proposals are “hopeless”. He agrees that we should try to illuminate representationality by limning its connections to the physical, the causal, the biological, and the teleological. But he insists that illumination need not yield a reduction of the intentional to the non-intentional. LOTH is neutral as to the naturalization of intentionality. An LOT theorist might attempt to reduce the intentional to the non-intentional. Alternatively, she might dismiss the reductive project as impossible or pointless. Assuming she chooses the reductive route, LOTH provides guidance regarding how she might proceed. According to RTT, X A’s that p iff there is a mental representation S such that X bears A* to S and S means that p. The task of elucidating “X A’s that p” in naturalistically acceptable terms factors into two sub-tasks (Field 2001: 33): As we have seen, functionalism helps with (a). Moreover, COMP provides a blueprint for tackling (b). We can first delineate a compositional semantics describing how S’s meaning depends upon semantic properties of its component words and upon the compositional import of the constituency structure into which those words are arranged. We can then explain in naturalistically acceptable terms why the component words have the semantic properties that they have and why the constituency structure has the compositional import that it has. How much does LOTH advance the naturalization of intentionality? Our compositional semantics for Mentalese may illuminate how the semantic properties of a complex expression depend upon the semantic properties of primitive expressions, but it says nothing about how primitive expressions get their semantic properties in the first place. Brentano’s challenge (How could intentionality arise from purely physical entities and processes?) remains unanswered. To meet the challenge, we must invoke naturalizing strategies that go well beyond LOTH itself, such as the causal or nomic strategies mentioned above. Those naturalizing strategies are not specifically linked to LOTH and can usually be tailored to semantic properties of neural states rather than semantic properties of Mentalese expressions. Thus, it is debatable how much LOTH ultimately helps us naturalize intentionality. Naturalizing strategies orthogonal to LOTH seem to do the heavy lifting.