 The deflationist idea that the equivalence schema (ES-prop) provides  an implicit definition of the concept of truth suggests that truth  is, as the label ‘redundancy theory’ suggests, a  redundant concept, a concept that we could do without. On the  contrary, however, advocates of the deflationary theory (particularly those influenced by Ramsey) are at pains to point out that anyone who has the concept of truth in this sense is in possession of a very  useful concept indeed; in particular, anyone who has this concept is  in a position to form generalizations that would otherwise require  logical devices of infinite conjunction. Suppose, for example, that Jones for whatever reason decides that  Smith is an infallible guide to the nature of reality. We might then  say that Jones believes everything Smith says. To say this much,  however, is not to capture the content of Jones's belief. In order to do that we need some way of expressing an infinite conjunction of  something like the following form: The equivalence schema (ES-prop) allows us to capture this infinite conjunction. For, on the basis of the schema, we can reformulate the infinite conjunction as: In turn, this reformulated infinite conjunction can be expressed as a statement whose universal quantifier ranges over propositions: Or, to put the same thing more colloquially: This statement give us the content of Jones's belief. And the  important point for deflationists is that we could not have stated  the content of this belief unless we had the concept of truth as  described by the deflationary theory. In fact, for most  deflationists, it is this feature of the concept of truth — its role in the formation of generalizations — that explains why we have a concept of truth at all. This is, as it is often put, the  raison d'être of the concept of truth. Given deflationists place such heavy emphasis on the role of the  concept of truth in expressing generalizations, it is ironic that  some versions of deflationism have been criticized for being  constitutionally incapable of accounting for generalizations about  truth (Gupta 1993, Halbach 1999, Soames 1999, Armour-Garb  2004). For example, theories that implicitly define truth using only  the instances of (ES-prop) do not allow us to derive a generalization like (Conjunction). Since the instances of (ES-prop) are a collection of particular  propositions and (Conjunction) is a universal generalization, it is  not possible to derive (Conjunction) from the instances of (ES-prop). Yet it is plausible that a theory of truth should allow us to derive  general truths about truth, like (Conjunction). This suggests that  deflationary theories of truth formulated using only the instances of (ES-prop) are inadequate. It is for this reason that some deflationists use a version of (Gen)  to formulate their theory of truth. There are two things to notice about (Gen). First, unlike (ES-prop)  it is not a schema, but a universally quantified formula. For this  reason, it is possible to derive (Conjunction) from it. That (Gen) is universally quantified also means it can be used as an explicit  definition of truth. So although deflationists often only implicitly  define truth, it is possible for a deflationist to offer an explicit  definition. Thus we have another dimension along which deflationary  theories can vary. Second, the existential quantifier in (Gen) must be a higher-order  quantifier that quantifies into sentential position. Wolfgang  Künne (2003) takes the existential quantifier to be an objectual (domain and values) quantifier ranging over propositions. A different approach would be to take the existential quantifier as a  substitutional quantifier where the substitution class consists of  sentences. Christopher Hill (2002) offers a further, idiosyncratic,  alternative and treats the existential quantifier as a substitutional quantifier whose substitution class is the set of all propositions.  However, all these approaches have drawn criticism on the grounds  that the use of higher-order quantifiers to define truth is circular  (Platts 1980, Horwich 1998b, McGrath 2000), and may get the extension of the concept of truth wrong (Sosa 1993). Unfortunately, we cannot  assess these criticisms here. We shall continue to concentrate mainly on those versions of deflationism formulated using instances of  (ES-prop). An alternative deflationist approach to the generalization problem is to attempt to show that, despite appearances, theories that only  appeal to the instances of (ES-prop) nevertheless do have the  resources to derive the problematic generalizations. Field (1994a),  for example, suggests that we allow reasoning with schemas and  proposes rules that would allow the derivation of generalizations.  Horwich (1998b) suggests a more informal approach according to which  we are justified in deriving (Conjunction) since an informal  inspection of a derivation of some instance of (Conjunction) shows us that we could derive any instance of it.