 One of the first issues to arise in neurology, as far back as the nineteenth century, concerned the localization of specific cognitive functions to specific brain regions. Although the “localization” approach had dubious origins in the phrenology of Gall and Spurzheim, and had been challenged strenuously by Flourens throughout the early nineteenth century, it re-emerged late in the nineteenth century in the study of aphasia by Bouillaud, Auburtin, Broca, and Wernicke. These neurologists made careful studies (when possible) of linguistic deficits in their aphasic patients, followed by brain autopsies post  mortem.[13]  Broca’s initial study of twenty-two patients in the mid-nineteenth century confirmed that damage to the left cortical hemisphere was predominant, and that damage to the second and third frontal convolutions was necessary to produce speech production deficits. Although the anatomical coordinates Broca postulated for the “speech production center” do not correlate exactly with damage producing production deficits, both this area of frontal cortex and speech production deficits still bear his name (“Broca’s area” and “Broca’s aphasia”). Less than two decades later Carl Wernicke published evidence for a second language center. This area is anatomically distinct from Broca’s area, and damage to it produced a very different set of aphasic symptoms. The cortical area that still bears his name (“Wernicke’s area”) is located around the first and second convolutions in temporal cortex, and the aphasia that bears his name (“Wernicke’s aphasia”) involves deficits in language comprehension. Wernicke’s method, like Broca’s, was based on lesion studies produced by natural trauma: a careful evaluation of the behavioral deficits, followed by post mortem autopsies to find the sites of tissue damage and atrophy. More recent and more careful lesion studies suggest more precise localization of specific linguistic functions, and remain a cornerstone to this day in aphasia research. Lesion studies have also produced evidence for the localization of other cognitive functions: for example, sensory processing and certain types of learning and memory. However, localization arguments for these other functions invariably include studies using animal models. With an animal model, one can perform careful behavioral measures in highly controlled settings, then ablate specific areas of neural tissue (or use a variety of other techniques to block or enhance activity in these areas) and re-measure performance on the same behavioral tests. Since we lack widely accepted animal models for human language production and comprehension, this additional evidence isn’t available to the neurologist or neurolinguists. This limitation makes the neurological study of language a paradigm case for evaluating the logic of the lesion/deficit method of inferring functional localization. Barbara Von Eckardt (Von Eckardt Klein 1978) attempted to make explicit the steps of reasoning involved in this common and historically important method. Her analysis begins with Robert Cummins’ well-known analysis of functional explanation, but she extends it into a notion of structurally adequate functional analysis. These analyses break down a complex capacity C into its constituent capacities c1, c2,…, cn, where the constituent capacities are consistent with the underlying structural details of the system. For example, human speech production (complex capacity C) results from formulating a speech intention, then selecting appropriate linguistic representations to capture the content of the speech intention, then formulating the motor commands to produce the appropriate sounds, then communicating these motor commands to the appropriate motor pathways (all together, the constituent capacitiesc1, c2,…, cn). A functional-localization hypothesis has the form: brain structure S in organism (type) O has constituent capacity ci, where ci is a function of some part of O. An example might be: Broca’s area (S) in humans (O) formulates motor commands to produce the appropriate sounds (one of the constituent capacities ci). Such hypotheses specify aspects of the structural realization of a functional-component model. They are part of the theory of the neural realization of the functional model. Armed with these characterizations, Von Eckardt Klein argues that inference to a functional-localization hypothesis proceeds in two steps. First, a functional deficit in a patient is hypothesized based on the abnormal behavior the patient exhibits. Second, localization of function in normal brains is inferred on the basis of the functional deficit hypothesis plus the evidence about the site of brain damage. The structurally-adequate functional analysis of the capacity connects the pathological behavior to the hypothesized functional deficit. This connection suggests four adequacy conditions on a functional deficit hypothesis. First, the pathological behavior P (e.g., the speech deficits characteristic of Broca’s aphasia) must result from failing to exercise some complex capacity C (human speech production). Second, there must be a structurally-adequate functional analysis of how people exercise capacity C that involves some constituent capacity ci (formulating motor commands to produce the appropriate sounds). Third, the operation of the steps described by the structurally-adequate functional analysis minus the operation of the component performing ci (Broca’s area) must result in pathological behavior P. Fourth, there must not be a better available explanation for why the patient does P. Arguments to a functional deficit hypothesis on the basis of pathological behavior is thus an instance of argument to the best available explanation. When postulating a deficit in a normal functional component provides the best available explanation of the pathological data, we are justified in drawing the inference. Von Eckardt Klein applies this analysis to a neurological case study involving a controversial reinterpretation of  agnosia.[14]  Her philosophical explication of this important neurological method reveals that most challenges to localization arguments either argue only against the localization of a particular type of functional capacity or against generalizing from localization of function in one individual to all normal individuals. (She presents examples of each from the neurological literature.) Such challenges do not impugn the validity of standard arguments for functional localization from deficits. It does not follow that such arguments are unproblematic. But they face difficult factual and methodological problems, not logical ones. Furthermore, the analysis of these arguments as involving a type of functional analysis and inference to the best available explanation carries an important implication for the biological study of cognitive function. Functional analyses require functional theories, and structurally adequate functional analyses require checks imposed by the lower level sciences investigating the underlying physical mechanisms. Arguments to best available explanation are often hampered by a lack of theoretical imagination: the available alternative explanations are often severely limited. We must seek theoretical inspiration from any level of investigation or explanation. Hence making explicit the “logic” of this common and historically important form of neurological explanation reveals the necessity of joint participation from all scientific levels, from cognitive psychology down to molecular neuroscience. Von Eckardt Klein (1978) thus anticipated what came to be heralded as the “co-evolutionary research methodology”, which remains a centerpiece of neurophilosophy to the present day (see  section 6). Over the last three decades, new evidence for localizations of cognitive functions has come increasingly from a new source, the development and refinement of neuroimaging techniques. However, the logical form of localization-of-function arguments appears not to have changed from those employing lesion studies, as analyzed by Von Eckardt Klein. Instead, these new neuroimaging technologies resolve some of the methodological problems that plagued lesion studies. For example, researchers do not need to wait until the patient dies, and in the meantime probably acquires additional brain damage, to find the lesion sites. Two functional imaging techniques have been prominent in philosophical discussions: positron emission tomography, or PET, and functional magnetic resonance imaging, or fMRI. Although these measure different biological markers of functional activity, PET approved for human use now has spatial resolution down to the single mm range, while fMRI has resolution down to less than  1mm.[15]  As these techniques increased spatial and temporal resolution of functional markers, and continued to be used with sophisticated behavioral methodologies, arguments for localizing specific psychological functions to increasingly specific neural regions continued to grow. Stufflebeam and Bechtel provided an early and philosophically useful discussion of PET. Bechtel and Richardson (1993) provided a general framework for “localization and decomposition” arguments, which anticipated in many ways the coming “new mechanistic” perspective in philosophy of science and philosophy of neuroscience (see  sections 7 and 8 below).  Bechtel and Mundale (1999) further refined philosophical arguments for localization of function specific to neuroscience. More recent philosophical discussion of these functional imaging techniques has tended to urge more caution resting localization claims on their results. Roskies (2007), for example, points out the tendency to think of the evidential force of functional neuroimages (especially fMRI) on an analogy of that of photographs. Drawing on work in aesthetics and the visual arts, Roskies argues that many of the features that give photographs their evidential force are not present in functional neuroimages. So while neuroimages do serve as evidence for claims about neurofunctions, and even for localization hypotheses, details of their proper interpretation are far more complicated than philosophers sometimes assume. More critically, Klein (2010) argues that images of “brain activity” resulting from functional neuroimaging, especially fMRI are poor evidence for functional hypotheses. For these images present the results of null hypothesis significance testing on fMRI data, and such testing alone cannot provide evidence about the functional structure of a causally dense system, which the human brain is. Instead, functional neuroimages are properly interpreted as indicating regions where further data and analysis are warranted. But these data will typically require more than simple significance testing, so skepticism about the evidential force of neuroimages does not warrant skepticism more generally about fMRI. Localization of function remains to this day a central topic of discussion in philosophy of neuroscience. We will cover more recent work in later sections.