 Truth-makers are often introduced in the following terms (Bigelow 1988: 125; Armstrong 1989c: 88): The sense in which a truth-maker “makes” something true is said to be different from the causal sense in which, e.g., a potter makes a pot. It is added that the primary notion of a truth-maker is that of a minimal one: a truth-maker for a truth-bearer p none of whose proper parts or constituents are truth-makers for p. (Whether every proposition has a minimal truth-maker is contentious.) We are also cautioned that even though people often speak as if there is a unique truth-maker for each truth, it is usually the case that one truth is made true by many things (collectively or severally). Whether (Virtue-T) provides a satisfactory elucidation of truth-making depends on whether we have a clear understanding of “in virtue of”. Some philosophers argue this notion is an unavoidable primitive (Rodriguez-Pereyra 2006a: 960–1). But others are wary. Thus, for example, Bigelow finds the locution “in virtue of” both obscure and, as will see, avoidable “we should not rest content with an explanation which turns on the notion of virtue!” (Bigelow 1988). These kinds of concern provides a significant motivation for establishing whether it is possible to elucidate the concept of truth-making in terms of notions that enjoy a life independently of the circle of notions to which in virtue of and truth-making belong. One influential proposal for making an elucidatory advance upon (Virtue-T) appeals to the notion of entailment (Fox 1987: 189; Bigelow 1988: 125–7): So x is a truth-maker for a truth p iff x exists and another representation that says x exists entails the representation that p. It is an attraction of this principle that the key notion it deploys, namely entailment, is ubiquitous, unavoidable and enjoys a rich life outside philosophy—both in ordinary life and in scientific and mathematical practice. Unfortunately this account threatens to over-generate truth-makers for necessary truths—at least if the notion of entailment it employs is classical. It’s a feature of this notion that anything whatsoever entails a necessary truth p. It follows as a special case of this that any claim that a given object exists must entail p too. So it also follows—if (Entailment-T) is granted—that any object makes any necessary truth true. But this runs counter to the belief that, e.g., the leftovers in your refrigerator aren’t truth-makers for the representation that 2+2=4. Even worse, Restall has shown how to plausibly reason from (Entailment-T) to “truth-maker monism”: the doctrine that every truth-maker makes every truth true (whether necessary or contingent). Every claim of the form p ∨ ~p is a necessary truth. So every existing thing s is a truth-maker for each instance of this form (see preceding paragraph). Now let p be some arbitrary truth (grass is green) and s any truth-maker for p ∨ ~p (a particular ice floe in the Antarctic ocean). Now it is intuitively plausible that something makes a disjunction true either by making one disjunct true or by making the other disjunct true (Mulligan, Simons, & Smith 1984: 316). This is what Restall calls “the disjunction thesis”. It follows from this thesis that either s makes p true or s makes ~p true. Given that p is true, neither s nor anything else makes it true that ~p. So s (the ice floe) must make it true that p (grass is green)! But since s and p were chosen arbitrarily it follows that all truth-makers are on a par, making true every truth (Restall 1996: 333–4). The unacceptability of these results indicates that insofar as we have an intuitive grip upon the concept of a truth-maker it is constrained by the requirement that a truth-maker for a truth must be relevant to or about what it represents as being the case. For example, the truths of pure arithmetic are not about what’s at the back of your refrigerator; what’s there isn’t relevant to their being true. So we’re constrained to judge that what’s there cannot be truth-makers for them. This suggests that operating at the back of our minds when we issue these snap judgements there must be something like the principle: Of course the notions of “about” and “relevance” are notoriously difficult to pin down (Goodman 1961). And a speaker can know something is true without knowing everything about what makes it true. Often it will require empirical research to settle what makes a statement true. Moreover, what is determined a posteriori to be a truth-maker may exhibit a complexity quite different from that of the statement it makes true (Mulligan, Simons, & Smith 1984: 299). Nevertheless, it is clear that unless (Entailment-T) is constrained in some way it will generate truth-makers that are unwanted because their presence conflicts with (Relevance). One way to restore accord between them would be to abandon the Disjunction Thesis that together with (Entailment-T) led us down the path to Truth-maker Monism. Indeed isn’t the Disjunction Thesis dubious anyway? Consider examples involving the open future. Can’t we imagine a situation arising that makes it true that one or other of the horses competing in a race will win, but which neither makes it true that one of the horses in particular will win nor makes it true that another will (Read 2000; Restall 2009)? For further discussion of issues surrounding truthmaking entailment, the Disjunctive Thesis and the Conjunctive Thesis, i.e. the principle that a truthmaker for a conjunction is a truthmaker for its conjuncts, see Rodriguez-Pereyra 2006a, 2009, Jago 2009, Lopez de Sa (2009) and Talasiewicz (et al) (2012). But even if the Disjunction Thesis is given up still this leaves in place the embarrassing consequence of defining what it is to be a truth-maker in terms of classical entailment, viz. that any existing thing turns out to be a truth-maker for any necessary truth. Some more radical overhaul of (Entailment-T) is needed to avoid over-generation. One possibility is to redefine what is to be a truth-maker in terms of a more restrictive notion of “relevant entailment” (in the tradition of Anderson & Belnap) that requires what is entailed to be relevant to what it is entailed by (Restall 1996, 2000; Armstrong 2004: 10–12). Whether exploring this avenue will take us very far remains a matter of dispute. Simons, for example, reflects, In truth however I suspect our intuitions about truth-makers may be at least as robust as our intuitions about what is good for a logical system of implication, and I would not at present attempt to explicate truth-making via the arrow of the relevance logic system R. (2008: 13) Nevertheless since truth-making concerns the bestowal of truth, entailment its preservation, there must at some level be an important connection to be made out between truth-making and entailment; the effort expended to make out such a connection will be effort spent to the advantage of metaphysicians and logicians alike. But even granted this is so there are reasons to be doubtful that any overhaul of (Entailment-T), however radical, will capture what it is to be a truth-maker. One vital motivation for believing in truth-makers is this. Positing truth-makers enables us to make sense of the fact that the truth of something depends on how things stand with an independently given reality. This is how Bigelow reports what happens to him when he stops believing in truth-makers: I find I have no adequate anchor to hold me from drifting onto the shoals of some sort of pragmatism or idealism. And that is altogether uncongenial to me; I am a congenital realist. (1988: 123) Truth-makers are posited to provide the point of semantic contact whereby true representations touch upon an independent reality, upon something non-representational. Since entailment is a relation between representations it follows that the notion of a truth-maker cannot be fully explicated in terms of the relation of entailment—regardless of whether representations are best understood as sentences or propositions or some other candidate truth-bearer (Heil 2000: 233–4; 2003: 62–5; Merricks 2007: 12–13). Ultimately (Entailment-T), or a relevance logic version if it, will leave us wanting an account of what makes a representation of the existence of a truth-maker—whatever it entails—itself beholden to an independent reality. This difficulty arises because entailment is a relation that lights upon representations at both ends. Appreciating this Armstrong recognised that truth-making cannot be any form of entailment. Both terms of an entailment relation must be propositions, but the truth-making term of the truth-maker relation is a portion of reality, and, in general at least, portions of reality are not propositions. (2004: 5–6; see also Lowe 2006: 185) Accordingly Armstrong made a bold maneuver. He posited a metaphysically primitive relation of necessitation (i.e., one not itself defined in terms of possible worlds because Armstrong is “opposed to the extensional view proposed by those who put metaphysical faith in possible worlds” preferring an ‘intensional account’ of modality instead (1997: 151, 2004: 96)). The relation in question lights upon a portion of reality at one end and upon a truth at the other. In the simplest case that means that the truth making relation is one that “holds between any truthmaker, T, which is something in the world, and the proposition” that T exists (2004: 6). Armstrong then defined what is to be a truth-maker in terms of this metaphysical bridging relation: This conception of truth making avoids the “category” mistake that results from attempting to define truth-making in terms of entailment. It also makes some advance upon (Virtue-T) and its primitive use of “in virtue of” because at least (Necessitation-T) relates the notion of truth making to other modal notions, like that of necessity, upon which we have some independent handle. But what is there positively to be said in favour of conceiving of truth-makers in terms of “necessitation”? Suppose that T is a candidate truth-maker for a truth p even though T fails to necessitate p. Then it is possible for T to exist even when p is false. Armstrong now reflects “we will surely think that the alleged truth-maker was insufficient by itself and requires to be supplemented in some way” (1997: 116). Suppose this supplementary condition is the existence of another entity, U. Then “T+U would appear to be the true and necessitating truth-maker for p” (2004: 7). Armstrong concludes that a truth-maker for a truth must necessitate the truth in question. Unfortunately this argument takes us nowhere except around in a circle. (Necessitation-T) embodies the doctrine that it is both necessary and sufficient for being a truth-maker that a thing necessitates the truth it makes true. Armstrong’s argument for this doctrine relies upon the dual assumptions: (1) anything that fails to necessitate p (witness T) cannot be a truth-maker for p,whereas (2) anything that succeeds in necessitating p (witness T+U) must be. But (1) just is the claim that it is necessary, and (2) just the claim that it is sufficient for being a truth-maker that a thing necessitates the truth it makes true. Since it relies upon (1) and (2), and (1) and (2) are just equivalent to (Necessitation-T), it follows that Armstrong’s argument is incapable of providing independent support for the conception he favours of what it is to be a truth-maker. Even though this argument may be circular, does (Necessitation-T) at least have the favourable feature that adopting it enables us to avoid the other difficulty that beset (Entailment-T), viz. over-generation? Not if there are things that necessitate a truth whilst still failing to be sufficiently relevant to be plausible truth-makers for it. If the necessitation relation is so distributed that it holds between any contingently existing portion of reality, e.g., an ice-floe, and any necessary truth, e.g., 2+2=4, then we shall be no further forward than we were before. So Armstrong needs to tell us more about the cross-categorial relation in question to assure us that such cases cannot arise. Smith suggests another problem case for (Necessitarian-T). Suppose that God wills that John kiss Mary now. God’s willing act thereby necessitates the truth of “John is kissing Mary”. (For Malebranche, all necessitation is of this sort.) But God’s act is not a truth-maker for this judgement. (Smith 1999: 6) If such cases are possible then (Necessitation-T) fails to provide a sufficient condition for being a truth-maker. In fact the commitment already emerges from (Necessitarian-T) if the necessitation relation it embodies is conceived as internal in the following sense: “An internal relation is one where the existence of the terms entails the existence of the relation” strung out between the terms; otherwise a relation is external (Armstrong 1997: 87). Armstrong argues that the relation of truth-making has to be internal (in just this sense) because if it weren’t then we would have to allow that, absurdly, “anything may be a truth-maker for any truth” (1997: 198). But then nothing but propositions—conceived in the self-interpreting sense—can be truth-bearers that are internally related to their truth-makers. Any other candidate for this representational role, as we’ve already reflected—a token belief state or utterance—could have been endowed with a different representational significance than the one it possesses. So the other eligible candidates, by contrast to propositions, aren’t internally related to what makes them true. Armstrong’s commitment to the truth-making relation’s being internal clashes with his naturalism (David 2005: 156–9). According to Armstrong, Truth attaches in the first place to propositions, those propositions which have a truth-maker. But no Naturalist can be happy with a realm of propositions. (Armstrong 1997: 131) So Armstrong counsels that we don’t take propositions with “ontological seriousness”: What exists are classes of intentionally equivalent tokens. The fundamental correspondence, therefore, is not between entities called truths and their truth-makers, but between the token beliefs and thoughts, on the one hand, and truth-makers on the other. (Armstrong 1997: 131) But naturalistically kosher token beliefs and thoughts aren’t internally related to what makes them true. So Armstrong’s naturalism commits him to denying that the truth-making relation is internal after all. Heil has also inveighed in a naturalistic spirit against incurring a commitment to propositions that are designed to have their own “built-in intentionality” whilst continuing to maintain that truth-making is an internal relation (2006: 240–3). Since we have no idea of what a naturalistic representation would look like that was internally related to what made it true, this appears to be an impossible combination of views. Our inability to conjure up a credible class of truth-bearers that are internally related to their truth-makers provides us with a very strong incentive for supposing that the truth-making relation is external. The long and short of it: if we are wary, as many naturalists are, of the doctrine that truth-bearers are propositions, then we should also be wary of thinking that the truth-making relation is internal. This spells trouble for (Necessitarian-T) and any other account of truth making which invoke internal relations to propositions. Smith tries to get around this problem by adding to (Necessitation-T) the further constraint that a truth-maker for a given truth should be part of what that truth is about: “roughly: it should fall within the mereological fusion of all the objects to which reference is made in the judgment” (1999: 6). His suggestion is that a typical contingent judgement p not only makes singular reference to the objects whose antics it describes but also “generic reference” to the events, processes and states that are associated with the main verb of the sentence that is used to express the judgement in question. So, for example, the judgement that John is kissing Mary incorporates not only singular reference to John and Mary but also generic reference to all kisses. Smith identifies the projection of a judgement with the fusion of all these things to which it refers (singularly or generically). He then defines what is to be a truth-maker in terms of this notion: Since God’s act of willing isn’t one of the things to which the judgement that John is kissing Mary makes singular or generic reference—it doesn’t fall within the projection of this judgement—His act isn’t a truth-maker for this judgement. But that fateful kiss does fall within the generic reference of the judgement that John is kissing Mary and necessitates the truth of that judgement; so the kiss is a truth-maker for it. Whether taking up (Projection-T) will avoid classifying malignant cases of necessitating things as truth-makers will depend upon whether the notion of projection can be made sufficiently precise to vindicate the intuition that the net cast by a judgement won’t catch these unwanted fishes with the rest of its haul; whether if the judgement that φx incorporates singular reference to x and generic reference to φ-ings, it doesn’t incorporate (even more) generic reference to anything else that may (waywardly) necessitate φx. (Here “φ” indicates the place for a verb phrase and “x” a place for a name.) Smith attempts to make the notion of projection precise using just mereology and classical entailment. Something belongs to the projection of a judgement that φx only if it is one of the things to which the judgement is existentially committed (Smith 1999: 7). In order to capture the “generic” as well as the singular consequences of a judgement, Smith includes amongst its existential consequences the fusions that result from applying the mereological comprehension principle (T≤) (∃xφx iff there exists a unique fusion of all and only those x such that φx) to the immediate commitments of the judgement. For example, the judgement that Nikita meows is immediately committed to the existence of a meow and thereby to the unique fusion of all and only meows. Because God’s act of willing John to kiss Mary doesn’t fall within the class of logical-cum-mereological consequences of the judgement that John is kissing Mary, His act isn’t a truth-maker for it. But this still threatens to over-generate truth-makers (Gregory 2001). The judgement that John is kissing Mary has amongst it existential consequences that someone exists. Since Smith assumes that “x exists”, like “x meows” and “x kisses Mary”, is a predicate, it also follows via (T≤) that the projection of this judgement includes the fusion of all and only existing things (Smith 1999: 10). But since (ex hypothesi) God’s act exists—and so belongs to the aforementioned fusion and thereby the projection of the judgement in question—and necessitates that John is kissing Mary, it fails to rule out God’s act as a truth-maker for it! The projection of a judgement needs to be made far more relevant to what a judgement is intuitively about; the logical-mereological notion of a projection supplied doesn’t even provide a basis for affirming that singular judgements don’t generically refer to every existing thing. An initial attractive move to avoid this particular problem would be to deny that “exists” is a predicate. But more generally, it remains to be seen whether an appropriate notion of a judgement’s referential net, its projection, can be made out that’s isn’t too permissive—thereby including illegitimate truth-makers—without having to deploy resources that are not obviously clearer or more problematic than that of truth-making itself (see Smith 2002 and Schnieder 2006b for contrasting prognoses). Others attempt to avoid over-generating truth-makers by appealing to the notion of essence, a notion that purports to be far more discriminating than necessitation (Fine 1994; Lowe 1994). The difference in grain between these notions becomes evident when we reflect that although it is (supposed to be) necessarily the case that if Socrates exists then his singleton does too, it isn’t part of the essence of Socrates that he belongs to this set. If these notions really are different then we will need to distinguish between those entities that merely necessitate a true claim on the one hand and those that are also part of its essence on the other. This suggests a strategy for ruling out spurious truth-makers: they’re the ones that only necessitate true claims, whereas the real ones are also implicated (somehow) in the essences of the claims they make true. This brings us back to the question of truth-bearers. If truth-makers are implicated in the essences of truth-bearers then truth-bearers can neither be sentences nor judgements. Truth-bearers of these kinds only bear their representational features accidentally; they could have been used to say or think something different, or occurred in contexts where they lacked significance altogether. Since they could have meant something different, or nothing at all, the truth-makers of these truth-bearers can hardly be implicated in their essences. Accordingly truth-bearers that essentially implicate their truth-makers must be creatures that could not have shifted or lacked their representational features. They must be propositions in the deep sense of being items that are incapable of meaning anything other than they do. Conceiving of propositions only in this sense and appealing to their essences, what is to be a truth-maker admits of the following definition (Mulligan 2003: 547, 2006: 39, 2007; Lowe 2006: 203–10, 2009: 209–15): If this definition is adopted then it is plausible to maintain that many of the spurious cases of truth-makers, which have afflicted accounts of truth-making in terms of entailment, necessitation or projection, will thereby be weeded out (Lowe 2006: 202–3). It isn’t part of the essence of the proposition that John is kissing Mary that it is true if there exists an act of God’s willing it. Nor is it part of the essence of the proposition that 2+2=4 that it is true if there is a particular ice floe in the Antarctic. It isn’t even part of the essence of the proposition that 2+2=4 that it is true if π exists. So none of these things are (spuriously) classified, if (Essential-T) is our touchstone, as truth-makers for these propositions. In this respect, the essentialist conception of truth-making has conspicuous advantages over its aforementioned rivals. Nevertheless, on the downside, it may be questioned whether our grip upon the notion of the essence of a proposition is any firmer than the notion of truth-maker for it. Moreover, the benefits of adopting (Essential-T) come at a cost. The idea of a truth-maker is introduced as “intuitively attractive” (Lowe 2006: 207). But (Essential-T) requires propositions that are not only abstract—already anathema to naturalists—but also mysterious, because they are, so to speak, self-interpreting, i.e. propositions that mean what they do irrespective of what speakers or thinkers ever do with the signs or judgements that express them. So the idea of a truth-maker turns out to be far less intuitive and attractive than it initially seemed. Nonetheless, this is a commitment some may accept anyway (Lowe 2009: 178–80), or may be willing to accept if it gives them a good account of truth-making. Essentialist conceptions of truth-making have proved less influential in the recent literature than grounding conceptions (1.6 below). This is surprising in light of the affinities between the notions of ground and essence, especially given the possibility, favoured by some, of explaining grounding in terms of essence (Correia 2013). This also means that at least some of the attractions and some of the objections to a grounding approach to truth making, discussed below, are liable to carry over to an essentialist approach. The difficulties that have beset the definitions of truth-making proffered so far have suggested to some philosophers that a pessimistic induction is in order: that the project of defining truth-making in more basic terms is misconceived, much as the project of defining knowledge in more basic terms has come to seem misconceived because e.g., of the Gettier cases. But there’s no gain to be had from, doing nothing more than declaring the notion of a truth-maker to be primitive. If it’s primitive then we also need to know how the notion may be fruitfully applied in association with other concepts we already deploy—entailment, existence, truth etc.—to describe the interplay of truth-bearers and the world. As Simons remarks, The signs are that truth-making is not analysable in terms of anything more primitive, but we need to be able to say more than just that. So we ought to consider it as specified by principles of truth-making. (2000: 20) In other words, the notion needs to be introduced non-reductively but still informatively and this is to be achieved by appealing to its systematic liaisons with other concepts. This is the approach that was originally shared by Mulligan, Simons and Smith (1984: 312–8). The principal schemata they employed to convey to us an articulate grasp of what truth-making means in non-reductive terms included: Each of these schemata specifies a definite linkage between the application of the notion of truth-making and some other condition. Truth-making is introduced as the notion that sustains all of these linkages. Putting the schemata together what it is to be a truth-maker is then definable intra-theoretically as follows, It is important to appreciate that adopting this approach to truth-making doesn’t have the benefits of theft over honest toil. For one thing it doesn’t obviate the threat of superfluous truth-makers for necessary truths. (Entailment) is the principle that truth-making tracks entailment: if A makes p true then it makes all the consequences of p true too. It’s a principle that recommends itself irrespective of whether truth-making can be defined. This is because it dovetails smoothly with the idea that one truth-maker can make many truths true. For example, suppose that a particular a has some absolutely determinate mass. It is entailed by this description that various determinable descriptions are also truly predicable of a. Some of these truths say more than others, nonetheless they all have the same truth-maker. Why so? Because they are entailed by a’s having the mass it does (Armstrong 1997: 130; 2004: 10–11). To answer so is to appeal to (Entailment). But if the entailment that truth-making tracks is classical then we are back to flouting (Relevance). If q is necessary then any contingent p classically entails q. So if something at the back of your refrigerator makes it true that p then by (Entailment) it makes q true too. To avoid flouting (Relevance) in this way (Entailment) had better be a principle that links truth-making to a more restrictive, non-classical notion of entailment (Mulligan, Simons, & Smith 1984: 316). So we won’t be saved the logical labour of figuring out which non-classical connective it is that contributes to capturing what it is to be a truth-maker. Nor will appealing to (Axiomatic-T) save us the hard work of figuring out what truth-makers and truth-bearers must be like in order to collectively realise the structure described by the axiom schemata for truth-makers we favour. But there is nothing about these schemata that demands truth-bearer and truth-maker be internally related. It is striking that the Axiomatic approach to truth-making has proved less popular in the recent literature than other more metaphysically-loaded conceptions, in terms of necessitation, essence or grounding. A principal attraction of the approach is its metaphysical neutrality. By contrast, in more recent debate, philosophers have preferred approaches which rely upon a distinctive metaphysical vision. Many recent approaches define truth-making in terms of grounding or what is sometimes described as non-causal metaphysical dependence. The notion of truth-making is typically introduced, as we have seen, in terms of the ideology of “in virtue of”. As we have also seen, many philosophers then ask: but what independent content can be given to this notion? In response to this challenge, a theory of grounding may be conceived as a general theory of “in virtue of” in terms of which truth-making may then be explained. A further consideration which motivates those already committed to grounding is the general methodological principle that favours theoretical unification. Their idea is that by conceiving of truth-making as a kind of grounding, we are able to understand truth-making better, i.e. not as an isolated phenomenon but as an instance of a more general pattern, thereby illuminating not only the nature of truth-making but grounding too. Early exponents of grounding within analytic philosophy date from the 1960s (Bergmann 1961: 229, Hochberg 1967: 416–7). Recently, grounding has been explained in a variety of different ways (Correia and Schnieder 2012, Raven 2015). But, broadly speaking, we can distinguish between two broad conceptions which assign different logical forms to grounding statements: (1) the “predicate” or “relational” view whereby grounding statements are assigned the logical form “x grounds y” where “x” and “y” mark singular term positions and the verb expresses a relation; (2) the “operator” view whereby the canonical form of a grounding statement is characterised by a sentence operator. So statements about something grounding something else have the logical form “p because q” where “p” and “q” mark positions for sentences. The predicate view of grounding is held by, amongst others, Schaffer 2009, Audi 2012, Raven 2012; the operator view is advanced by Fine 2001, 2012, Schnieder 2006a, Correia 2011. (A third approach, owed to Mulligan 2007, recognises a plurality of different forms of grounding statements.) The choice between (1) and (2) is often made either on the basis of an assessment of the logical form of typical grounding claims, or on the basis of ontological commitment, for example, the claim that the operator approach to grounding is “ontologically neutral” because (allegedly) operators don’t stand for anything as (allegedly) predicates do (Correia 2010: 254, Fine 2012: 47). We can now distinguish two broad conceptions of truth-making, defined, respectively, in terms of the operator and predicate approach to grounding. For the former, see Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005, Schaffer 2009, Jago 2018: 184–202, for the latter, Correia 2005 (sec. 3.2), 2011, Schnieder 2006a, Mulligan 2007, Caputo 2007. One attraction of conceiving truth-making as based on grounding, aside from the more general methodological virtues of theoretical unification mentioned above, arises from taking grounding to be “hyperintensional” nature. Grounding is intended to be a notion that’s fine-grained enough to distinguish those entities, e.g., the cardinal numbers, that ground a necessary truth, such as 2+2=4, from those that don’t, e.g. a contingent existent such as the aforementioned ice floe. Because grounding is so fine-grained neither Grounding-Predicate-T or Grounding-Operator-T will give rise to the over-generation that beset Entailment-T and Necessitation-T but without having to appeal, like Projection-T, to an underdeveloped notion of “about ” or “relevance”. Of course, in light of sec, 1.2 and 1.4 above, we can foresee a downside to this. Both Grounding-Predicate-T and Grounding-Operator-T quantify over propositions that stand hyperintensionally to their truth-makers. It follows that both Grounding-Predicate-T and Grounding-Operator-T share a commitment with Necessitarian-T and Essentialist-T, viz. an ontology of abstract propositions which have their meanings essentially. But, again, this may be a commitment many grounding theorists have already made or be willing to accept if it gives them a good account of truth-making. Another issue is that there is no consensus upon the formal properties of grounding. Whilst, for example, Schaffer (2009: 376) has maintained that grounding is irreflexive, asymmetric and transitive, Rodriguez-Pereyra (2015) has argued that the relation of truth-making isn’t any of these things. But Rodriguez-Pereyra also argues that grounding isn’t any of those things either. So far we have considered efforts to define truth-making in terms of grounding. But there are other approaches in the literature which seek to endorse one notion at the expense of the other. One way accepts grounding as a welcome theoretical innovation but argues that we are better off without truth-making, at least in the forms which have become familiar to us. A second way continues to endorse truth-making whilst rejecting grounding. The first approach, taken by Fine, involves embracing grounding but rejecting truth-making. It’s truth-making, he argues, we can do without; grounding does a better job (Fine 2012; 43–6). Here truth-making is conceived as a relation between a worldly entity and a representation: the existence of the entity guarantees the truth of the representation. But, Fine argues, it is more theoretically fruitful to take grounding as the central notion for metaphysics. This is partly because, Fine maintains, grounding is a less restrictive notion than truth-making, because grounding does not require that the ultimate source of what is true should lie in what exists, rather we can remain open about what form grounding takes. Moreover, whilst there may be genuine questions about what the ground is for the truth of the representation that p there may be further questions about what makes it the case that p and these questions will typically have nothing to do with representation as such. Because truth-making is typically understood in modal terms, i.e. necessitation is conceived to be sufficient for truth-making, Fine is also sceptical that there is any way of avoiding the over-generation of truth-makers we have already discussed (see 1.1 and 1.2 above). Finally, Fine thinks that we should be able to conceive of the world hierarchically, whereby (e.g.) the normative is grounded in the natural, the natural in the physical and the physical in the micro-physical. But this is difficult to do if we think in terms of truth-making, because if (e.g.) we conceive of a normative representation being made true by the existence of something natural, that natural thing is just the wrong sort of thing to be made true by something at the physical level because it is not a representation. Liggins (2012) maintains, like Fine, that the theory of truth-making is inevitably less general than a theory of grounding. But Liggins also argues that appealing to grounding obviates the need to appeal to truth-makers in the sense that (e.g.) Armstrong maintained. This is because one significant reason for positing truth-makers is that doing so enables us to explain the asymmetric sense in which truth depends upon being (see sec. 3.2 below). But, Liggins maintains, this can already be done in terms of grounding, by saying that the fact that p grounds the fact that a certain proposition is true, namely the proposition that p. According to Liggins, this isn’t a case of truth-making because the relation of grounding invoked holds solely between two facts, albeit one of them a fact about a proposition, that it is true, rather than, as Liggins reads the requirements of truth-maker theory, a relation holding between something and a proposition. Fine’s critique of truth-making presupposes that we can only avail ourselves of truth-making if we conceive of truth-making in monolithic terms, as providing a unique method for metaphysics. But whilst, for example, Armstrong may have had a tendency to think in such terms, this doesn’t appear to be mandated by the nature of truth-making itself. One might, as Asay (2017) argues, instead conceive of grounding and truth-making as complementary projects, whereby a theory of truth-making doesn’t purport to do everything a theory of grounding does and so reciprocal illumination remains a live possibility. Indeed one might already think of the aforementioned definitions or elucidations of truth-making, which are designed in terms of a hyperintensional notion of grounding in order to avoid over-generation of truthmakers as one way in which grounding is already being used to illuminate truth-making. The second approach, outlined above, refusing grounding but favouring truth-making, is advanced by Heil (2016). Heil is generally suspicious of grounding because, he points out, grounding is often characterized in different and incompatible ways, so he is sceptical that there is a univocal concept of grounding to be had. But, more specifically, Heil has long maintained that hierarchical conceptions of reality spell trouble because of the difficulties explaining the causal and nomological relationship between the layers (Heil 2003: 31–9). He argues that this was the problem identified for supervenience and realization in the ‘90s and it’s a problem inherited by the hierarchical conception of reality to which grounding gives rise. So Heil does a modus tollens where Fine does a modus ponens. Whilst Fine conceives of the hierarchical styles of explanation grounding provides as one of the principal virtues of grounding, Heil considers this is one of the deepest drawbacks of grounding. By contrast with Fine, Heil instead recommends truth-making as the proper methodology for metaphysics because it enables us to give a non-hierarchical description of reality whereby fundamental physics gives us the truth-makers for truths that have truth-makers. Further and independent objections to grounding include whether the notion of grounding is intelligible (Daly 2012), theoretically unified (MacBride 2013b), theoretically illuminating (Wilson 2014) or the result of a cognitive illusion (Miller and Norton 2017). Other available positions include: that truth making is a special kind of grounding which involves a unique form of dependence (Griffith 2013), and that truth making isn’t grounding but that grounding is key to truthmaking (Saenz 2018).