 Like most medieval accounts of knowledge, Ockham’s is not much concerned with answering skeptical doubts. He takes it for granted that humans not only can but frequently do know things, and focuses his attention instead on the “mechanisms” by which this knowledge comes about. Ockham’s theory of knowledge, like his natural philosophy, is broadly Aristotelian in form, although—again, like his natural philosophy—it is “Aristotelian” in its own way. For most Aristotelians of the day, knowledge involved the transmission of a  “species”[39]  between the object and the mind. At the sensory level, this species may be compared to the more recent notion of a sense “impression.” More generally, we can think of it as the structure or configuration of the object, a structure or configuration that can be “encoded” in different ways and found isomorphically in a variety of contexts. One recent author, describing the theory as it occurs in Aquinas, puts it like  this:[40] The configuration of features found in the external object is also found in “encoded” form as a species in the organ that senses the object. (Depending on the sense modality, it may also be found in an intervening medium. For example, with vision and hearing, the species is transmitted through the air to the sense organ.) At the intellectual level, the so called “agent intellect” goes to work on this species and somehow produces the universal concept that is the raw material of intellectual  cognition.[41] Ockham rejected this entire theory of species. For him, species are unnecessary to a successful theory of cognition, and he dispenses with  them.[42]  Moreover, he argues, the species theory is not supported by experience; introspection reveals no such species in our cognitive  processes.[43]  This rejection of the species theory of cognition, which had been foreshadowed by several previous authors (such as Henry of Ghent in the thirteenth century), was an important development in late medieval  epistemology.[44] One of the more intriguing features of late medieval epistemology in general, and of Ockham’s view in particular, is the development of a theory known as “intuitive and abstractive cognition.” The theory is found in authors as diverse as Duns Scotus, Peter Auriol, Walter Chatton, and Ockham. But their theories of intuitive and abstractive cognition are so different that it is hard to see any one thing they are all supposed to be theories of. Nevertheless, to a first approximation, intuitive cognition can be thought of as perception, whereas abstractive cognition is closer to imagination or remembering. The fit is not exact, however, since authors who had a theory of intuitive and abstractive cognition usually also allowed the distinction at the intellectual level as well. It is important to note that abstractive cognition, in the sense of this theory, has nothing necessarily to do with “abstraction” in the sense of producing universal concepts from cognitive encounters with individuals. Instead, what abstractive cognition “abstracts” from is the question of the existence or non-existence of the object. By contrast, intuitive cognition is very much tied up with the existence or non-existence of the object. Here is how Ockham distinguishes  them:[45] Abstractive cognition, however, is that by virtue of which it cannot be evidently known of the thing whether it exists or does not exist. And in this way abstractive cognition, as opposed to intuitive cognition, “abstracts” from existence and non-existence, because by it neither can it be evidently known of an existing thing that it exists, nor of a non-existent one that it does not exist. Ockham’s main point here is that an intuitive cognition naturally causes in the mind a number of true contingent judgements about the external thing(s) that caused this intuitive cognition; for example, that this thing exists, or that it is white, and so on. This does not prevent God from deceiving any particular creature if He wants to, even when an intuitive cognition is present, but in such a case, God would have to neutralize the natural causal effect of this intuitive cognition (this is something He can always do, according to Ockham) and directly cause instead a false judgement. Intuitive cognitions, on the other hand, can sometimes induce false beliefs, too, if the circumstances are abnormal (in cases of perceptual illusions in particular), but even then, they would still cause some true contingent judgements. The latter at any rate is their distinctive feature. Abstractive cognitions, by contrast, are not such as to naturally cause true judgements about contingent  matters.[46]