 Wittgenstein’s non-referential, formalist conception of mathematical propositions and terms begins in the  Tractatus.[1]  Indeed, insofar as he sketches a rudimentary Philosophy of Mathematics in the Tractatus, he does so by contrasting mathematics and mathematical equations with genuine (contingent) propositions, sense, thought, propositional signs and their constituent names, and truth-by-correspondence. In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein claims that a genuine proposition, which rests upon conventions, is used by us to assert that a state of affairs (i.e., an elementary or atomic fact; ‘Sachverhalt’) or fact (i.e., multiple states of affairs; ‘Tatsache’) obtain(s) in the one and only real world. An elementary proposition is isomorphic to the possible state of affairs it is used to represent: it must contain as many names as there are objects in the possible state of affairs. An elementary proposition is true iff its possible state of affairs (i.e., its ‘sense’; ‘Sinn’) obtains. Wittgenstein clearly states this Correspondence Theory of Truth at (4.25): If an elementary proposition is true, the state of affairs exists; if an elementary proposition is false, the state of affairs does not exist. But propositions and their linguistic components are, in and of themselves, dead—a proposition only has sense because we human beings have endowed it with a conventional sense (5.473). Moreover, propositional signs may be used to do any number of things (e.g., insult, catch someone’s attention); in order to assert that a state of affairs obtains, a person must ‘project’ the proposition’s sense—its possible state of affairs—by ‘thinking’ of (e.g., picturing) its sense as one speaks, writes or thinks the proposition (3.11). Wittgenstein connects use, sense, correspondence, and truth by saying that “a proposition is true if we use it to say that things stand in a certain way, and they do” (4.062; italics added). The Tractarian conceptions of genuine (contingent) propositions and the (original and) core concept of truth are used to construct theories of logical and mathematical ‘propositions’ by contrast. Stated boldly and bluntly, tautologies, contradictions and mathematical propositions (i.e., mathematical equations) are neither true nor false—we say that they are true or false, but in doing so we use the words ‘true’ and ‘false’ in very different senses from the sense in which a contingent proposition is true or false. Unlike genuine propositions, tautologies and contradictions “have no ‘subject-matter’” (6.124), “lack sense”, and “say nothing” about the world (4.461), and, analogously, mathematical equations are “pseudo-propositions” (6.2) which, when ‘true’ (‘correct’; ‘richtig’ (6.2321)), “merely mark … [the] equivalence of meaning [of ‘two expressions’]” (6.2323). Given that “[t]autology and contradiction are the limiting cases—indeed the disintegration—of the combination of signs” (4.466; italics added), where the conditions of agreement with the world—the representational relations—cancel one another, so that [they] do[] not stand in any representational relation to reality, tautologies and contradictions do not picture reality or possible states of affairs and possible facts (4.462). Stated differently, tautologies and contradictions do not have sense, which means we cannot use them to make assertions, which means, in turn, that they cannot be either true or false. Analogously, mathematical pseudo-propositions are equations, which indicate or show that two expressions are equivalent in meaning and therefore are intersubstitutable. Indeed, we arrive at mathematical equations by “the method of substitution”: starting from a number of equations, we advance to new equations by substituting different expressions in accordance with the equations. (6.24) We prove mathematical ‘propositions’ ‘true’ (‘correct’) by ‘seeing’ that two expressions have the same meaning, which “must be manifest in the two expressions themselves” (6.23), and by substituting one expression for another with the same meaning. Just as “one can recognize that [‘logical propositions’] are true from the symbol alone” (6.113), “the possibility of proving” mathematical propositions means that we can perceive their correctness without having to compare “what they express” with facts (6.2321; cf. RFM App. III, §4). The demarcation between contingent propositions, which can be used to correctly or incorrectly represent parts of the world, and mathematical propositions, which can be decided in a purely formal, syntactical manner, is maintained by Wittgenstein until his death in 1951 (Zettel §701, 1947; PI II, 2001 edition, pp. 192–193e, 1949). Given linguistic and symbolic conventions, the truth-value of a contingent proposition is entirely a function of how the world is, whereas the “truth-value” of a mathematical proposition is entirely a function of its constituent symbols and the formal system of which it is a part. Thus, a second, closely related way of stating this demarcation is to say that mathematical propositions are decidable by purely formal means (e.g., calculations), while contingent propositions, being about the ‘external’ world, can only be decided, if at all, by determining whether or not a particular fact obtains (i.e., something external to the proposition and the language in which it resides) (2.223; 4.05). The Tractarian formal theory of mathematics is, specifically, a theory of formal operations. Over the past 20 years, Wittgenstein’s theory of operations has received considerable examination (Frascolla 1994, 1997; Marion 1998; Potter 2000; and Floyd 2002), which has interestingly connected it and the Tractarian equational theory of arithmetic with elements of Alonzo Church’s \(\lambda\)-calculus and with R. L. Goodstein’s equational calculus (Marion 1998: chapters 1, 2, and 4). Very briefly stated, Wittgenstein presents: adding that “[t]he concept of number is… the general form of a number” (6.022). As Frascolla (and Marion after him) have pointed out, “the general form of a proposition is a particular case of the general form of an ‘operation’” (Marion 1998: 21), and all three general forms (i.e., of operation, proposition, and natural number) are modeled on the variable presented at (5.2522) (Marion 1998: 22). Defining “[a]n operation [as] the expression of a relation between the structures of its result and of its bases” (5.22), Wittgenstein states that whereas “[a] function cannot be its own argument,… an operation can take one of its own results as its base” (5.251). On Wittgenstein’s (5.2522) account of ‘[\(a, x, O \spq x\)]’, the first term of the bracketed expression is the beginning of the series of forms, the second is the form of a term \(x\) arbitrarily selected from the series, and the third [\(O \spq x\)] is the form of the term that immediately follows \(x\) in the series. Given that “[t]he concept of successive applications of an operation is equivalent to the concept ‘and so on’” (5.2523), one can see how the natural numbers can be generated by repeated iterations of the general form of a natural number, namely ‘[\(0, \xi , \xi +1\)]’. Similarly, truth-functional propositions can be generated, as Russell says in the Introduction to the Tractatus (p. xv), from the general form of a proposition ‘[\(\overline{p}\), \(\overline{\xi}\), \(N(\overline{\xi})\)]’ by taking any selection of atomic propositions [where \(p\) “stands for all atomic propositions”; “the bar over the variable indicates that it is the representative of all its values” (5.501)], negating them all, then taking any selection of the set of propositions now obtained, together with any of the originals [where \(x\) “stands for any set of propositions”]—and so on indefinitely. On Frascolla’s (1994: 3ff) account, a numerical identity “\(\mathbf{t} = \mathbf{s}\)” is an arithmetical theorem if and only if the corresponding equation “\(\Omega^t \spq x = \Omega^s \spq x\)”, which is framed in the language of the general theory of logical operations, can be proven. By proving the equation “\(\Omega^{2 \times 2}\spq x = \Omega^{4}\spq x\)”, which translates the arithmetic identity “\(2 \times 2 = 4\)” into the operational language (6.241), Wittgenstein thereby outlines “a translation of numerical arithmetic into a sort of general theory of operations” (Frascolla 1998: 135). Despite the fact that Wittgenstein clearly does not attempt to reduce mathematics to logic in either Russell’s manner or Frege’s manner, or to tautologies, and despite the fact that Wittgenstein criticizes Russell’s Logicism (e.g., the Theory of Types, 3.31–3.32; the Axiom of Reducibility, 6.1232, etc.) and Frege’s Logicism (6.031, 4.1272,  etc.),[2]  quite a number of commentators, early and recent, have interpreted Wittgenstein’s Tractarian theory of mathematics as a variant of Logicism (Quine 1940 [1981: 55]; Benacerraf & Putnam 1964a: 14; Black 1964: 340; Savitt 1979 [1986: 34]; Frascolla 1994: 37; 1997: 354, 356–57, 361; 1998: 133; Marion 1998: 26 & 29; and Potter 2000: 164 and 182–183). There are at least four reasons proffered for this interpretation. Though at least three Logicist interpretations of the Tractatus have appeared within the last 20 years, the following considerations (Rodych 1995; Wrigley 1998) indicate that none of these reasons is particularly cogent. For example, in saying that “[m]athematics is a method of logic” perhaps Wittgenstein is only saying that since the general form of a natural number and the general form of a proposition are both instances of the general form of a (purely formal) operation, just as truth-functional propositions can be constructed using the general form of a proposition, (true) mathematical equations can be constructed using the general form of a natural number. Alternatively, Wittgenstein may mean that mathematical inferences (i.e., not substitutions) are in accord with, or make use of, logical inferences, and insofar as mathematical reasoning is logical reasoning, mathematics is a method of logic. Similarly, in saying that “[t]he logic of the world” is shown by tautologies and true mathematical equations (i.e., #2), Wittgenstein may be saying that since mathematics was invented to help us count and measure, insofar as it enables us to infer contingent proposition(s) from contingent proposition(s) (see 6.211 below), it thereby reflects contingent facts and “[t]he logic of the world”. Though logic—which is inherent in natural (‘everyday’) language (4.002, 4.003, 6.124) and which has evolved to meet our communicative, exploratory, and survival needs—is not invented in the same way, a valid logical inference captures the relationship between possible facts and a sound logical inference captures the relationship between existent facts. As regards #3, Black, Savitt, and Frascolla have argued that, since we ascertain the truth of tautologies and mathematical equations without any appeal to “states of affairs” or “facts”, true mathematical equations and tautologies are so analogous that we can “aptly” describe “the philosophy of arithmetic of the Tractatus… as a kind of logicism” (Frascolla 1994: 37). The rejoinder to this is that the similarity that Frascolla, Black and Savitt recognize does not make Wittgenstein’s theory a “kind of logicism” in Frege’s or Russell’s sense, because Wittgenstein does not define numbers “logically” in either Frege’s way or Russell’s way, and the similarity (or analogy) between tautologies and true mathematical equations is neither an identity nor a relation of reducibility. Finally, critics argue that the problem with #4 is that there is no evidence for the claim that the relevant operation is logical in Wittgenstein’s or Russell’s or Frege’s sense of the term—it seems a purely formal, syntactical operation. “Logical operations are performed with propositions, arithmetical ones with numbers”, says Wittgenstein (WVC 218); “[t]he result of a logical operation is a proposition, the result of an arithmetical one is a number”. In sum, critics of the Logicist interpretation of the Tractatus argue that ##1–4 do not individually or collectively constitute cogent grounds for a Logicist interpretation of the Tractatus. Another crucial aspect of the Tractarian theory of mathematics is captured in (6.211). Indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never what we want. Rather, we make use of mathematical propositions only in inferences from propositions that do not belong to mathematics to others that likewise do not belong to mathematics. (In philosophy the question, ‘What do we actually use this word or this proposition for?’ repeatedly leads to valuable insights.) Though mathematics and mathematical activity are purely formal and syntactical, in the Tractatus Wittgenstein tacitly distinguishes between purely formal games with signs, which have no application in contingent propositions, and mathematical propositions, which are used to make inferences from contingent proposition(s) to contingent proposition(s). Wittgenstein does not explicitly say, however, how mathematical equations, which are not genuine propositions, are used in inferences from genuine proposition(s) to genuine proposition(s) (Floyd 2002: 309; Kremer 2002: 293–94). As we shall see in  §3.5,  the later Wittgenstein returns to the importance of extra-mathematical application and uses it to distinguish a mere “sign-game” from a genuine, mathematical language-game. This, in brief, is Wittgenstein’s Tractarian theory of mathematics. In the Introduction to the Tractatus, Russell wrote that Wittgenstein’s “theory of number” “stands in need of greater technical development”, primarily because Wittgenstein had not shown how it could deal with transfinite numbers (Russell 1922[1974]: xx). Similarly, in his review of the Tractatus, Frank Ramsey wrote that Wittgenstein’s ‘account’ does not cover all of mathematics partly because Wittgenstein’s theory of equations cannot explain inequalities (Ramsey 1923: 475). Though it is doubtful that, in 1923, Wittgenstein would have thought these issues problematic, it certainly is true that the Tractarian theory of mathematics is essentially a sketch, especially in comparison with what Wittgenstein begins to develop six years later. After the completion of the Tractatus in 1918, Wittgenstein did virtually no philosophical work until February 2, 1929, eleven months after attending a lecture by the Dutch mathematician L.E.J. Brouwer.