 Tarski did not think that the construction of section 3 completely solved the problem of offering “a materially adequate definition of the concept of consequence” (Tarski 1983c, p. 418).  According to Tarski, perhaps the most important difficulty that remained toward solving that problem is created by the fact that “underlying our whole construction is the division of all terms of the language discussed into logical and extra-logical” (Tarski 1983c, p.  418). This situation is tolerable because, as Tarski says in a letter of 1944, “it is clear that for all languages which are familiar to us such definitions [of ‘logical term’ and ‘logical truth’] can be given (or rather: have been given); moreover, they prove fruitful, and this is really the most important. We can define ‘logical terms’, e.g., by enumeration” (Tarski 1987, p. 29). But since the division is not based on a previous characterization of logical terms generally applicable to arbitrary languages, to that extent the definition of logical consequence is not fully general, and hence unsatisfactory. In the final paragraph of the consequence paper Tarski says that a positive solution to the problem would “enable us to justify the traditional boundary between logical and extra-logical expressions” (Tarski 1983c, p. 420). In fact, this is the boundary which for Tarski is “underlying our whole discussion”. Tarski says that the distinction between logical and extra-logical terms is not entirely arbitrary, because if we were to include signs like the implication sign or the universal quantifier among the extra-logical terms, “our definition of the concept of consequence would lead to results which obviously contradict ordinary usage” (Tarski 1983c, p. 418). This is so because in this case the definition would not declare logical consequences many instances of the relation consecrated by the common usage of logicians. However, Tarski does not seem to worry that the opposite problem may arise. The possibility exists, according to him, of extending the set of logical terms without making the definition of logical consequence useless. Even if all terms of the language are considered logical, the definition results in a characterization of a special concept of consequence, that of material consequence. When he speaks of extending liberally the set of logical terms, Tarski is perhaps thinking of the phenomenon of what he calls the “disciplines preceding a given discipline” in Tarski (1937) (see p. 80). He speaks of logic as preceding every discipline, in the sense that logical constants and logical laws are presupposed by and form part of every science. But similarly, in developing a certain theory, not only logic but other theories may be taken for granted; thus Tarski speaks of logic and arithmetic as a conveniently presupposed basis of theories for the development of geometry. This would account naturally for the fact that Tarski was skeptical about the possibility of finding a sharp distinction between logical and extra-logical terms, for it might very well depend on the context of investigation what terms and what laws are considered as forming part of the “logic” of the investigation. An example which we know Tarski had in mind is the sign for the membership relation. We find him saying: “sometimes it seems to me convenient to include mathematical terms, like the ∈-relation, in the class of logical ones, and sometimes I prefer to restrict myself to terms of ‘elementary logic’. Is any problem involved here?” (Tarski 1987, p. 29). We may take the sign for membership as a logical sign in some formalizations of the theory of types (which can in turn be used to formalize theories with arbitrary universes of individuals). But when doing set theory for its own sake, the appropriate thing is not to take membership as a logical notion, and not to assume principles about membership as forming part of the “logic” of the theory, but as postulates thereof. Tarski’s final remarks in the paper on logical consequence again put forward the view that the notion of logical constant may be of a relative character. In different contexts different terms may be taken as logical and therefore so may vary the extension of the relation of logical consequence. He says that “the fluctuation in the common usage of the concept of consequence would—in part at least—be quite naturally reflected in such a compulsory situation” of relativity (Tarski 1983c, p. 420). But this does not mean that no desiderata could or should be imposed on a definition of the concept of a logical constant. Many years after writing his paper on logical consequence, Tarski returned to the problem of the definition of the concept of a logical term, advancing an attempt at a positive solution. Tarski thought that this solution accommodated his conviction that the notion of a logical term is not an absolute, but a relative one. The basis for the proposed solution appears in Tarski’s 1966 lecture “What are Logical Notions?” (published posthumously as Tarski 1986a). Here Tarski first makes some remarks about the general nature of his proposal. He says that an answer to a question like the one that gives title to the lecture may take several forms. It may give an account of the prevailing usage of the term “logical notion”, or of the prevailing usage of the term among people who are qualified to use it. It may be a normative proposal, a suggestion that the term be used in a certain way, independently of its actual use. As a third possibility, some other answers Immediately Tarski makes it clear that he is also not concerned with developing a normative proposal, but an account which captures a certain common use of the concept of logical notion: “in answering the question ‘What are logical notions?’ what I shall do is make a suggestion or proposal about a possible use of the term ‘logical notion’. This suggestion seems to me to be in agreement, if not with a prevailing usage of the term ‘logical notion’, at least with one usage which actually is encountered in practice” (Tarski 1986a, p. 145). What are notions? Tarski says: He then proposes to define logical notions as those notions invariant under all one-one transformations of the universe of discourse onto itself: A one-one transformation of a class onto itself, also called a permutation, induces permutations of all the types in the hierarchy of types of “notions” determined by the class. Thus, a permutation P of a domain of individuals D induces a permutation of the class of n-ary relations of elements of D, a permutation of the class of functions with n arguments with domain Dn and range included in D, a permutation of the class of n-ary relations among relations of elements of D, etc. A notion or object O of a certain type t is invariant under all permutations of the universe of discourse if, for every permutation P of this universe, the permutation P̃ induced by P in the class of notions of type t is such that P̃(O)=O. There is no straightforward way in which the truth-functions and the quantifiers (over any type of objects) are identifiable with notions in the sense of Tarski. According to John Corcoran (see footnote 6 in Tarski 1986a, p. 150), in one version of the lecture Tarski indicated that the truth-functions and classical quantifiers can be constructed as certain objects in the type hierarchy that are invariant under all permutations, and, in this sense, are logical notions. (Clearly, Tarski took the logicality of these notions almost for granted, and was concerned with a definition which gave some account of the status of other more substantive notions in various mathematical languages.) For example, the truth-values “true” and “false” can be identified with the universe of individuals and the null set, respectively, and the truth-functions in turn with functions having (tuples of) these classes as arguments and values; and the classical universal and existential quantifiers over a type of objects t can be identified with certain functions from the class of sets of objects of type t into the class of truth-values—identifying “true” with the universal set of objects of type t and “false” with the empty set of that type. (A universal quantifier will assign “true” to the set of all objects of type t, and “false” to all other subsets of t; and the existential quantifier will assign “true” to the non-empty subsets, and “false” to the empty subset.) In 1966 Tarski does not propose a definition of the concept of logical constant. One such definition, based on the 1966 idea, appears in a book Tarski wrote in collaboration with Steven Givant, published in 1987, four years after Tarski’s death. The main concern of Tarski and Givant (1987) is to indicate how to develop set theory in several different languages and to compare their expressive power. They define the concept of logical constant for constants in the vocabulary of a certain class of languages—all of which are in a certain sense extensions of a basic language in which they are particularly interested, weaker than the languages in which set theory is usually developed in means of expression, and yet sufficiently powerful for many purposes. The vocabulary of the basic language is composed of three two-place predicate constants of the second type and four two-place function constants of the third type; the vocabulary of the extensions considered by Tarski and Givant can only include constants of those two kinds. (However, as we will see, there does not seem to be any problem in extending the range of applicability of their definition to wider classes of languages.) They then prove several results about that class of languages, results that involve the defined concept of logical constant. Tarski and Givant introduce informally the concept of a derivative universe of a given basic universe U. A derivative universe Ũ of a given basic universe U is what we have been calling the class of all objects of a certain type, generated from that basic universe U. Thus, the class of n-ary relations of elements of U (for any given n), the class of n-ary relations among relations of elements of U, etc., are derivative universes of U. After introducing in the same way as above the concepts of a permutation of the universe and of invariance of a member of a derivative universe under every permutation of the basic universe, Tarski and Givant give the following definitions: Given a basic universe U, a member M of any derivative universe Ũ is said to be logical, or a logical object, if it is invariant under every permutation P of U. (Strictly speaking, since an object M can be a member of many derivative universes, we should use in (i) the phrase “is said to be logical, or a logical object, as a member of Ũ”.) (i) and the parenthetical comment that comes after it embody fairly accurately the basic idea behind the (relativized) definition of a logical notion offered in Tarski (1986a), and (ii) offers the (absolute) definition of the concept of logical constant. There is no apparent obstacle to applying (ii) to wider classes of languages than the class considered for special purposes of their investigation by Tarski and Givant. It seems safe to assume that the definition can be applied to a large class of languages in the classical hierarchy of quantificational languages. Tarski and Givant themselves say that the usual logical constants of languages not in the class considered by them, like the symbols for the truth-functional connectives and quantifiers, “can also be subsumed under logical constants in the sense of (ii)” (Tarski and Givant 1987, p. 57), presumably through some artifice in the style of the one discussed above. (As we will soon see, at the very least Tarski clearly would want his definition to be applicable to some languages whose set of sentences is that of some formulations of the simple theory of types.) In Tarski and Lindenbaum (1935) the authors had proved that given a basic universe U, all the notions in derivative universes of U which can be defined in the language of the simple theory of types are invariant under all permutations of U. In general the Tarski-Lindenbaum theorem guarantees that all mathematical notions definable in the logicist fashion in the simple theory of types are logical notions no matter what the universe of individuals is taken to be (Tarski says that “we may interpret [the universe of the intended interpretation of the language of the theory of types] as the universe of physical objects, although there is nothing in Principia mathematica which compels us to accept such an interpretation” (Tarski 1986a, p. 152)). Since the theorem applies to every universe U supplying an interpretation of the language of the theory of types, the definition of the concept of logical constant in Tarski and Givant (1987) implies that all primitive symbols denoting notions in that language (e.g. quantifiers of all orders) are Tarskian logical constants; also, if the definition were applicable to defined symbols, all these symbols would be Tarskian logical constants. Such results agree well with a “usage actually encountered in practice” (for example, the practice of the logicists, but of others as well) according to which the constants of the language of the theory of types are logical constants. When the Tarski-Givant definition is applied to interpreted languages of mathematical theories with undefined mathematical primitives, it will generally yield the result that the notions denoted by these primitives are not Tarskian logical constants. Tarski’s example is set theory formalized in first-order with a single primitive predicate for membership as a relation among elements of the universe (see Tarski 1986a, p. 153). Obviously membership as a relation over a domain of individuals and sets is not invariant under all permutations of that domain, so it is not declared a logical notion of the language of set theory by Tarski’s proposed definition. Similarly, the class of all sets will be declared non-logical provided the class of individuals that are not sets is not empty. A predicate whose intended meaning is membership (among elements of the universe) is not a Tarskian logical constant, simply because there is a universe in which it denotes a non-logical object (with respect to that universe); similarly, a predicate “S” whose intended meaning is “is a set” (such as is used in some formalizations of set theory suitable for contemplating individuals other than sets in the universe) is not a Tarskian logical constant, for there is a universe in which “S” denotes a non-logical object (in such a universe, the class of objects that are not sets must be non-empty). These results are again in agreement with actual usage, for example in the model theory of first-order set theory, where the membership predicate is taken as a non-logical constant. From the consideration of the examples provided by the theory of types and first-order set theory, Tarski extracts a conclusion that he welcomed. This is the conclusion that, in a certain sense, the distinction between logical and non-logical constants is relative to a context of investigation. Recall Tarski’s remarks about the sign for membership in a letter of 1944. In the 1966 lecture Tarski says that membership is a logical notion in some formalizations of the theory of types. He says: It is a bit unclear that the “notions” of membership that Tarski talks about are notions in the sense introduced by him earlier in the lecture. They do not “occur” in any type, given the standard formulations of the theory of types (even in formulations in which a sign for membership is used), for they are relations among objects of different types, which do not occur in a non-cumulative hierarchy. But Tarski is perhaps thinking of some non-standard, cumulative type hierarchy. Under a suitable expansion of the concept of a notion, the notions of membership Tarski has in mind will indeed be invariant under permutations of any universe, and hence logical; and the sign or signs for these notions of membership will be Tarskian logical constants. On the other hand, as pointed out above, membership as a relation over the domain of individuals and sets will not be a logical notion in that domain, and hence the sign for this concept of membership will not be a Tarskian logical constant. Thus, interestingly, Tarski’s definition of the concept of logical constant respects in a sense his early relativistic view in the paper on logical consequence. Tarski describes the situation in the following passage: