 Tarski presents his theory of logical consequence in Tarski (1936a) (German version, Tarski 1936b; English translation of the Polish, Tarski 2002; English translation of the German, Tarski 1983c). This classic paper begins with some general remarks on the possibility of a precise definition of the concept of consequence. The essence of these remarks is that since the common concept is vague, it seems certainly difficult, and perhaps impossible, to reconcile all features of its use in the definition of a corresponding precise concept. Nevertheless, Tarski says, logicians had thought until recently that they had managed to define a precise concept that coincided exactly in extension with the intuitive concept of consequence. Tarski mentions the extraordinary development of mathematical logic in recent decades, which had shown “how to present mathematical disciplines in the shape of formalized deductive theories” (Tarski 1983c, p. 409). In these theories, consequences are extracted from axioms and theorems by rules of inference, “such as the rules of substitution and detachment” (Tarski 1983c, p. 410), of a purely syntactical (or “structural”, in Tarski’s word) nature. “Whenever a sentence follows from others, it can be obtained from them—so it was thought—by means of the transformations prescribed by the rules” (Tarski 1983c, p. 410). According to Tarski, this belief of the logicians was justified by “the fact that they had actually succeeded in reproducing in the shape of formalized proofs all the exact reasonings which had ever been carried out in mathematics” (Tarski 1983c, p. 410). But Tarski goes on to claim that that belief of the logicians was wrong. There are some non-vague cases in which a certain sentence of a higher-order language follows in the intuitive sense from a set of other sentences of that language but cannot be derived from them using the accepted axioms and rules. These cases are provided by some ω-incomplete theories, theories in which for some predicate P the sentences A0. 0 possesses the given property P, A1. 1 possesses the given property P, and, in general, all sentences of the form An can be proved, but the universal sentence A. Every natural number possesses the given property P, cannot be proved on the basis of the accepted axioms and rules of inference. (LGTC provides an example of such a theory.) “Yet intuitively it seems certain that the universal sentence A follows in the usual sense from the totality of particular sentences A0, A1, …, An, ….  Provided all these sentences are true, the sentence A must also be true” (Tarski 1983c, p. 411). Tarski considers the possibility of adding an ω-rule to the accepted rules of inference, that is, a rule which allows us to deduce a universal sentence of the form of A from the set of sentences A0, A1, etc. However, he says that such a rule would differ in very essential respects from the old rules: it is not a finitary rule, while all the accepted rules in common deductive systems are finitary. Also, Tarski immediately takes importance away from the further suggestion of supplementing the old system of rules by means of a formalized finitary ω-rule. He points out that in view of Gödel’s incompleteness results, no matter how many new finitary rules or axioms we add to certain higher-order theories, they will still remain incomplete theories, in fact ω-incomplete theories. This discussion is enough to show that “in order to obtain the proper concept of consequence, which is close in essentials to the common concept, we must resort to quite different methods and apply quite different conceptual apparatus in defining it” (Tarski 1983c, p. 413). The different methods and the different conceptual apparatus that Tarski has in mind are going to be “the methods which have been developed in recent years for the establishment of scientific semantics, and the concepts defined with their aid” (Tarski 1983c, p. 414; a footnote refers us to Tarski’s monograph on truth). The best way of appreciating the nature of Tarski’s theory of logical consequence and how it constitutes an application of the methods of Tarskian semantics is to see how it applies to a particular formal language of a simple structure, of a kind that Tarski seems to have primarily in mind in his paper of 1936. We will choose a simple language of this kind for a fragment of elementary arithmetic. This language, LAr, can be given this quick description: In the 1936 paper Tarski seems to be thinking paradigmatically of languages in which (as in LAr) there is a predicate (“N” in the case of LAr) that applies exactly to the individuals in the domain of the intended interpretation of the language. He says elsewhere that the variables of such a language range exclusively over the individuals of that set (cf. Tarski 1937, p. 84). (This is not to say that Tarski adopts these conventions with all the languages he considers. For example, he does not adopt them with languages which, like LGTC, are used to talk about arbitrary individuals, as opposed to specific sets of  them).[2] In the considerations preliminary to the presentation of his theory, Tarski says that when a sentence X of a formal language (e.g., LAr) is a logical consequence of a set K of sentences of that language, the argument with premises K and conclusion X has the following property, that Tarski calls “condition (F)”: Let’s clarify the sense of condition (F) with an example. Consider a language LAr+ which is like LAr but has besides another individual constant, “2”, and another dyadic predicate, “Pd”, whose desired interpretations are the number 2 and the relation of being the immediate predecessor of, respectively. Let K be the following set of sentences of LAr+: {“∀x(Nx→¬Mx0)”, “N0”} (these sentences are true); and let X be the sentence “¬M00”. The argument with premises K and conclusion X is intuitively logically correct; thus, according to Tarski, it must verify condition (F). This means that any argument obtained from it by uniform replacement of non-logical constants by non-logical constants must be an argument where it is not the case that the premises are true and the conclusion false. Let’s suppose that the non-logical constants of LAr+ are “0”, “N”, “M”, “2”, and “Pd”. Replace “0” with “2” and “M” with “Pd” in the argument with premises K and conclusion X and call the resulting set of premises and conclusion “K′” and “X′”. That is, K′ is {“∀x(Nx→¬Pdx2)”, “N2”} and X′ is “¬Pd22”. In virtue of condition (F), the argument with premises K′ and conclusion X′ must be an argument where it is not the case that the premises are true and the conclusion false; and that’s in fact the case: the first premise is false, and the second premise and the conclusion are true. Tarski wonders if it is possible to offer condition (F) as a definition of the relation of logical consequence, that is, if we can take (F) not only as a necessary but also a sufficient condition for an argument to be an instance of logical consequence. His answer is that we cannot. The reason is that condition (F) Tarski notes that in order for an argument to be an instance of logical consequence it need not be sufficient that all arguments of the same form be arguments where it is not the case that the premises are true and the conclusion false. It is conceivable that one may interpret the non-logical constants of the argument by means of certain objects (individuals, sets, etc.) in such a way that the premises thus reinterpreted become true and the conclusion becomes false, and that nevertheless (some of) those objects not be denoted by non-logical constants of the language that is being considered; in such a case we would not say that the argument is an instance of logical consequence, in spite of the fact that it would satisfy condition (F). To give an example, suppose that the language we are considering is LAr+. Since both the relation of being less than and the relation of being the immediate predecessor of are irreflexive over the domain of the natural numbers, the sentence “∀x(Nx→¬Mxx)” would be a logical consequence of every set of premises on criterion (F): no replacement of the non-logical constants “N” and “M” by other non-logical constants of LAr+ turns that sentence into a falsehood. But clearly “∀x(Nx→¬Mxx)” is not a logical consequence of, say, “N0”. This can be justified, e.g., keeping fixed the usual interpretation of “0” and “N” but observing that “M” can be interpreted by means of the reflexive relation of being less than or equal to; under this interpretation, “∀x(Nx→¬Mxx)” is false, although “N0” is true. (Tarski’s remark that the supposition that all objects have names in the language can never be realized can be justified, for example, by observing that there are non-denumerably many sets of natural numbers, but in the languages he considers there are only denumerably many constants.) Tarski’s proposal consists in making tighter the requirement expressed by condition (F), so as to incorporate the idea that a logically correct argument cannot be reinterpreted in such a way that the premises become true and the conclusion false; in other words, the idea that a sentence X is a logical consequence of a set of sentences K when every interpretation on which all the sentences of K are true is an interpretation on which X is true (or, to use a common terminology, when every interpretation preserves the truth of the premises in the conclusion). As Tarski says, the idea of understanding the notion of logical consequence by means of the notion of truth preservation on all interpretations is not an original idea of his, but one implicit in the logical and mathematical practice of his time (especially among mathematicians interested in offering independence proofs). What is new to Tarski’s proposal is that he makes precise the idea using the apparatus he had developed for the mathematical characterization of satisfaction and truth. He does not give a detailed example, but it seems reasonably clear how he would proceed from the indications he gives in (1936a), (1936b) and (1937). Tarski uses a certain precise notion of interpretation for a formal language. In our example, an interpretation of LAr is a sequence <A, a, R> that assigns appropriate objects to the non-logical constants of LAr: a set of individuals A to “N”, an individual a to “0” and a binary relation among individuals R to “M”. Besides, he always requires that the objects assigned by an interpretation to the other non-logical constants of a language be drawn from the set assigned to the non-logical predicate that restricts the range of quantification to a specific set of individuals (“N” in the case of LAr) (cf.  Tarski 1937, §34); so in the case of LAr the individual assigned to “0” must belong to the set assigned to “N” and the relation assigned to “M” must be a relation among objects in the set assigned to “N”. Tarski introduces the notion of a sentential function. A sentential function S′ of a sentence S is the result of uniformly replacing the non-logical constants appearing in S with corresponding variables of suitable types (and different from the variables already existing in the language). For example, the sentential function determined by the sentence “∀x(Nx→¬Mx0)” is the expression “∀x(Px→¬Yxy)” (in which “P”, “Y” and “y” are new variables). It is equally possible to define the more general notion of a formula function, in an analogous way, except that now S may be an open formula. The sentential functions of sentences of LAr will not in general be sentences, and so will not always be either true or false by themselves. But they will always be either true or false with respect to interpretations of LAr; or, as Tarski says, they will be satisfied or not by interpretations of LAr. The concept of satisfaction of a sentential function by an interpretation can be defined using the Tarskian method for defining satisfaction. Say that an interpretation <A, a, R> of LAr satisfies the formula function X with respect to a sequence f (that assigns values from A to the original variables of LAr) if and only if: This is a recursive definition, entirely parallel to the definition of satisfaction of formulae by sequences in the definition of satisfaction for LCC in Tarski’s monograph on truth, that we saw in section 1 above. In the same way that that definition, the one just given can be turned into an explicit one by the same method. The notion of satisfaction of a sentential function is easy to characterize in terms of the defined notion of satisfaction of a formula function. Say that an interpretation <A, a, R> satisfies sentential function X if and only if <A, a, R> satisfies formula function X with respect to every sequence. This definition is analogous to the Tarskian definition of truth. In terms of the defined notion of satisfaction, Tarski introduces the notion of a model of a sentence. A model of a sentence S is an interpretation that satisfies the sentential function S′ determined by S; more generally, a model of a set of sentences K is an interpretation that satisfies all the sentential functions determined by sentences of K. And in terms of the defined notion of model Tarski proposes his defined notion of logical consequence. A sentence X is a (Tarskian) logical consequence of the sentences in set K if and only if every model of the set K is also a model of sentence X (cf.  Tarski 1983c, p. 417). Tarski proposes also a defined notion of logical truth (he uses the expression “analytic truth”) using the same apparatus: a sentence S is a (Tarskian) logical truth if and only if every interpretation of S is a model of S.  Analogous notions of Tarskian logical consequence and logical truth can be defined for other languages using the same method we have followed with LAr, just making the obvious changes. After presenting his definition of logical consequence, Tarski immediately adds that condition (F) can be shown to hold of arguments falling under the defined notion: (The proof that Tarski seems to have in mind is this: suppose that X is a Tarskian logical consequence of K; then there is no model of K which is not a model of X; so there is no substitution instance <K′, X′> of <K, X> such that the sentences in K′ are true and X′ is false; for if there was one such, it would readily provide an interpretation—constituted by the extensions of the extra-logical constants of <K′, X′>—which would constitute a model of K that would not be a model of X. But whether this is the proof Tarski had in mind is a disputed exegetical question.) Hence, as was to be desired, if the defined relation of logical consequence holds for a given pair <K, X>, then also condition (F) holds for it.  (Although this can be shown, the converse cannot; that is, it cannot be shown that if X and K satisfy (F) then X follows from K according to Tarski’s definition. But this is all right, since, as Tarski has already pointed out, (F) is not a sufficient condition for the ordinary notion of consequence.)