 Hempel’s most important contributions to the theory of science have been a series of explications of the structure of scientific explanations. His methodology was such that, following the preliminary examination of the linguistic and physical phenomena under consideration, he would advance a semi-formal characterization, one which he would subsequently subject to formal characterization using the resources of symbolic logic. The overarching theme of his work was the conception of explanation by subsumption, where specific events are subsumed by corresponding laws (of physics, of chemistry, of biology, and so forth). The conception of explanation by subsumption is rather ancient in its lineage, but Hempel advanced explicit formulations that drew distinctions between explanations of different kinds, especially those that invoke universal (or deterministic) laws, statistical (or probabilistic) laws, and the explanation of laws by means of theories. Hempel implemented the conception of subsumption by presuming that explanations explain the occurrence of singular events by deriving their descriptions from premises that include at least one lawlike sentence, which thereby displays (what he called) their nomic expectability. In the simplest cases, explanations assume the following form: Figure 2. An Explanation Schema Thus, in relation to Figure 2, \(C_1\), \(C_2\),…, \(C_r\) describe specific conditions (referred to as “initial” or “antecedent”) and \(L_1\), \(L_2\),…, \(L_k\) general laws, where “\(E\)” describes the event to be explained. The explanation takes the form of an inductive or deductive argument, where the premises are called the “explanans” and the conclusion the “explanandum”. Richard Jeffrey (1969) noted that Hempel’s conception harmonizes well with Aristotle’s definition of (what he called) unqualified scientific knowledge, [where] the premisses of demonstrated knowledge must be true, primary, immediate, better known than and prior to the conclusion, which is further related to them as effect to cause. (Posterior Analytics 1.71–2, as quoted in Jeffrey 1969: 104) A potentially even more illuminating comparison emerges from the perspective of Aristotle’s theory of the four causes, where the laws are the material cause, the antecedent conditions the efficient cause, the logical relation between the explanans and the explanandum the formal cause and the explanandum the final cause (Fetzer 2000a: 113–114). There were important differences in their conceptions of law. Aristotle’s general premises were definitional, necessarily, whereas Hempel’s were not. For Aristotle, the general premises of scientific explanations are generalizations that describe commensurately universal properties of things of a subject kind, \(K\). Merely universal properties are ones that everything of kind \(K\) has but could be without and remain a thing of that kind, just as every Honda might have Michelin tires. Aristotle referred to such properties as “accidental”. Commensurately universal properties are ones that belong to everything of the kind as necessary attributes that they cannot be without. A triangle, for example, has three lines and angles. Aristotle referred to them as “essential”. Because generalizations about the essential properties of things of a kind are “proper definitions”, they provide the basis for explanations that qualify as analytic. Hempel encompassed analytic generalizations within the scope of “fundamental laws” as defined in Hempel and Oppenheim (1948), but he focused on those that were synthetic. Analytic explanations are common in the currents of daily life, especially in the context of explaining how you “know that” something is the case. A mother might explain to her single daughter that she knows that John must be unmarried, because a friend told her that John is a bachelor. Similar cases of analytic explanations can occur in scientific contexts, such as knowing that the element they are dealing with is gold because it has atomic number 79, when gold is defined by its atomic number. Knowing why John is a bachelor, however, is another matter. Indeed, in Hempel (1965c), he would distinguish between reason-seeking why-questions and explanation-seeking why-questions, where the former seek reasons that justify believing that something is the case, as opposed to the latter, which are usually motivated by knowledge that a specific event has occurred. In his semi-formal explication of the requirements for adequate scientific explanations, Hempel specified four conditions of adequacy (CA) that have to be satisfied, namely: These conditions are intended to serve as requirements whose satisfaction guarantees that a proposed explanation is adequate. Hempel drew several distinctions over time between potential scientific explanations (which satisfy the first three conditions, but possibly not the fourth) and confirmed scientific explanations (which are believed to be true but might turn out to be false). Hempel recognized that (CA-3) was a redundant condition, since it would have to be satisfied by any explanation that satisfied (CA-1) and (CA-2). Insofar as the explanandum describes an event that occurred during the history of the world, its derivation thereby implies the explanans has empirical content. Hempel’s conditions had many virtues, not least of which was that they appeared to fit many familiar examples of scientific explanations, such as explaining why a coin expanded when it was heated by invoking the law that copper expands when heated and noting that the coin was copper. Hempel doesn’t specify the form laws may take, which could be simple or complex. Most of his examples were simple, such as “All ravens are black”, “All gold is malleable”, and so on. Others were quantitative, such as Archimedes’ principle (A body totally immersed in a fluid—a liquid or a gas—experiences an apparent loss in weight equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces), Snell’s law (During refraction of light, the ratio of the sines of the angles of incidence and of refraction is a constant equal to the refractive index of the medium), and Newton’s law of gravitation (Any two bodies attract each other with a force proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them), which he discussed. More complicated examples can be found in standard sources, such as The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Feynman et al. 1963–65), the first volume of which is devoted to mechanics, radiation, and heat; the second, to electromagnetism and matter; and the third, to quantum mechanics. Hempel explored the implications of (CA-4) for laws: The requirement of truth for laws has the consequence that a given empirical statement \(S\) can never be definitely known to be a law; for the sentence affirming the truth of \(S\) is tantamount to \(S\) and is therefore capable only of acquiring a more or less high probability, or degree of confirmation, relative to the experimental evidence available at any given time (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948: note 22, italics added). Hempel considered weakening condition (CA-4) to one of high confirmation instead of truth, but concluded that it would be awkward to have “adequate explanations” that are later superseded by different “adequate explanations” with the acquisition of additional evidence and alternative hypotheses across time. He therefore retained the condition of truth. Whether or not the conditions of explanatory adequacy should be relative to an epistemic context of confirmation rather than to an ontic context of truth would become an important question in coping with the requirements for probabilistic explanations. No aspect of Hempel’s position generated more controversy than the symmetry thesis, which holds that, for any adequate explanation, had its premises—its initial conditions and covering laws—been taken into account at a suitable prior time, then a deductive prediction of the occurrence of the explanandum event would have been possible, and conversely (Hempel & Oppenheim 1948). Inferences from adequate explanations to potential predictions were generally accepted, but not the converse. Critics, such as Michael Scriven (1962), advanced counter-examples that were based on correlations or “common causes”: the occurrence of a storm might be predicted when cows lie down in their fields, for example, yet their behavior does not explain why the storm occurs. Sylvain Bromberger offered the example of the length of the shadow cast by a flagpole, which is sufficient to deduce the height of the flagpole and thus satisfies Hempel’s conditions but does not explain why the flagpole has that height (Bromberger 1966). Since logical relations are non-temporal, Hempel may have taken the symmetry thesis to be a trivial consequence of his account, but deeper issues are involved here. Hempel observed that universal generalizations of the form, “\((x)(Fx \supset\) Gx)”, are true if and only if logically equivalent generalizations of the form, “\((x)(\neg Fx \vee Gx)\)”, are true. But if “\(Fx\)” stands for an uninstantiated property, such as being a vampire, then, since “\(\neg Fx\)” is satisfied by everything, regardless of the attribute “\(Gx\)”, “\(\neg Gx\)”, etc., that hypothesis—and its logical equivalents—are not only universally confirmed but even qualify as “laws”. This is not surprising, from a logical point of view, since extensional logic is purely truth functional, where the truth value of molecular sentences is a function of the truth values of its atomic constituents. But it implies that an empirical generalization that might be true of the world’s history may or may not be “lawful”, since it could be the case that its truth was merely “accidental”. Hempel’s endorsement of Goodman’s approach to select generalizations that support subjunctive conditionals, therefore, was not only consistent with the tradition of Hume—who believed that attributions of natural necessity in causal relations are merely “habits of mind”, psychologically irresistible, perhaps, but logically unwarranted—but circumvented a disconcerting consequence of his explication. There is a fundamental difference between sentences that “support subjunctives” and those that “entail subjunctives”, when the selection of those that support subjunctives is made on pragmatic grounds. Popper captured the crucial difference between material (extensional) generalizations and subjunctive (intensional) generalizations as follows: A statement may be said to be naturally or physically necessary if, and only if, it is deducible from a statement function which is satisfied in all worlds that differ from our own, if at all, only with respect to initial conditions. (Popper 1965: 433) Indeed, the existence of irreducibly ontic probabilistic phenomena, where more than one outcome is possible under the same initial conditions, would mean that the history of an indeterministic world might be identical with the history of a deterministic one, where their differences were concealed “by chance”. Even a complete description of the history of the actual world might not suffice to distinguish between them, where fundamental aspects of their causal structure would remain beyond empirical detection. The difference between Popper’s universal predicates and Goodman’s paradoxical ones may derive from the consideration that incorporating specific times into his definitions entails reference to specific moments of time \(t\), such as midnight tonight, during the history of the actual world, a point to which we are going to return. It follows that they cannot be “universal” in Popper’s sense and do not even qualify as “purely qualitative” in Hempel’s, either. Reliance upon material conditionals within first-order symbolic logic, moreover, forfeits the benefits of synthetic subjunctives. If the hypothesis, “All ravens are black”, is more adequately formalized as a subjunctive of the form, “\((x)(Rx \rightarrow Bx)\)”, where the truth of a subjunctive hypothetically assumes that its antecedent condition is satisfied, that obviates the paradox: white shoes are not ravens, and Nicod’s criteria apply Instances of “\(Rx\)” and “\(Bx\)” thereby confirm the hypothesis; instances of “\(Rx\)” and “\(\neg Bx\)” disconfirm it; and instances of “\(\neg Rx\)” are epistemically neutral, precisely as Nicod said.