 I shall refer to the brand of knowledge Descartes seeks in the Meditations, as ‘perfect knowledge’. Famously, he defines perfect knowledge in terms of doubt. While distinguishing lesser grades of conviction, and perfect knowledge,he writes: In the Second Replies, he adds: These passages (and others) suggest an account wherein doubt is the contrast of certainty. As my certainty increases, my doubt decreases; conversely, as my doubt increases, my certainty decreases. The requirement that knowledge is to be based in complete, or perfect certainty, thus amounts to requiring a complete inability to doubt one’s convictions – an utter indubitability. This conception of the relationship between certainty and doubt helps underwrite Descartes’ methodical emphasis on doubt, the so-called ‘method of doubt’ (discussed in  Section 2). That perfect knowledge requires that it be “impossible for us ever to have any reason for doubting what we are convinced of” marks an extraordinarily high standard of justification. Is this the only standard deserving of knowledge-talk? This is a difficult question to answer, because Descartes didn’t write in English. But arguably he’s an epistemic contextualist, at least in the sense of invoking the notion of knowledge in divergent contexts that presuppose different epistemic standards. We’ll see, for example, that he holds that even the deductive demonstrations of expert geometers fall short of the standards needed for perfect knowledge; yet, the kind of terminology he uses to characterize their epistemic achievements is routinely rendered in terms of knowledge-talk, in standard English translations of his work. The certainty/indubitability of interest to Descartes is psychological in character, though not merely psychological – not simply an inexplicable feeling. It has also a distinctively epistemic character, involving a kind of rational insight. During moments of certainty, it is as if my perception is guided by “a great light in the intellect” (Med. 4, AT 7:59, CSM 2:41). This rational illumination empowers me to “see utterly clearly with my mind’s eye”; my feelings of certainty are grounded – indeed, “I see a manifest contradiction” in denying the proposition of which I’m convinced. (Med. 3, AT 7:36, CSM 2:25) Descartes characterizes these epistemically impressive cognitions in terms of their being perceived clearly and distinctly. The Meditations never defines these terms; indeed, it sometimes uses them in confusing ways (e.g., sometimes using clarity-talk as a shorthand for the conjunction of clarity and distinctness). The Principles offers the following definitions: Other texts indicate that clarity contrasts with obscurity, and distinctness with confusedness. Though having clear and distinct apprehension is epistemically impressive, we’ll see that it is merely a necessary condition of perfect knowledge, not a sufficient condition. Should we regard Descartes’ account of perfect knowledge as a version of the justified true belief analysis of knowledge tracing back to Plato? The above texts are among Descartes’ clearest statements concerning perfect knowledge. Yet they raise questions about the extent to which his account is continuous with other analyses of knowledge. Prima facie, his characterizations imply a justified belief analysis – or using language closer to his own (and where justification is construed in terms of unshakability), an unshakable conviction analysis. There’s no stated requirement that the would-be knower’s conviction is to be true, as opposed to being unshakably certain. Is truth, therefore, not a requirement of perfect knowledge? We’ll return to the issue in  Section 6.4. One way to divide up theories of justification is in terms of the internalism-externalism distinction. Very roughly: a theory of epistemic justification is internalist insofar as it requires that the justifying factors are accessible to the knower’s conscious awareness; it is externalist insofar as it does not impose this requirement. Descartes holds an internalist account requiring that all justifying factors take the form of ideas. Various texts imply that ideas are, strictly speaking, the only objects of immediate perception or awareness. (More on the directness or immediacy of sense perception in  Section 9.1.)  Independent of assumptions about the directness of perception, Descartes’ method of doubt underwrites an assumption with similar force: for almost the entirety of the Meditations, his meditator-spokesperson – hereafter, the ‘meditator’ – adopts the methodological assumption that all his thoughts and experiences are occurring in a dream. This assumption is tantamount to requiring that justification comes in the form of ideas, rather than via direct perception of an extramental world. An important consequence of this kind of interpretation – namely, a traditional representationalist understanding of ideas – is that rigorous philosophical inquiry must proceed via an inside-to-out strategy. This strategy is assiduously followed in the Meditations, and it endures as a hallmark of many early modern epistemologies. Ultimately, all judgments are grounded in an inspection of the mind’s ideas. Philosophical inquiry is, properly understood, an investigation of ideas. The methodical strategy of the Meditations has the effect of forcing readers to adopt this mode of inquiry. In recent years, some commentators have questioned this traditional way of understanding the mediating role of ideas. Noteworthy is John Carriero’s outstanding commentary on the Meditations (2009), an account providing a serious challenge to traditional representationalist interpretations (including interpretations typically assumed in the present treatment). How are would-be knowers to proceed in identifying candidates for perfect knowledge? Distinguish particularist and methodist answers to the question. The particularist is apt to trust our prima facie intuitions regarding particular knowledge claims. These intuitions may then be used to help identify more general epistemic principles. The methodist, in contrast, is apt to distrust our prima facie intuitions. The preference is instead to begin with general principles about proper method. The methodical principles may then be used to arrive at settled, reflective judgments concerning particular knowledge claims. Famously, Descartes is in the methodist camp. Those who haphazardly “direct their minds down untrodden paths” are sometimes “lucky enough in their wanderings to hit upon some truth,” but “it is far better,” writes Descartes, “never to contemplate investigating the truth about any matter than to do so without a method” (Rules 4, AT 10:371, CSM 1:15f). Were we to rely on our prima facie intuitions, we might accept that the earth is unmoved, or that ordinary objects (as tables and chairs) are just as they appear. Yet, newly emerging mechanist doctrines of the 17th century imply otherwise. Descartes thinks such cases underscore the unreliability of our prima facie intuitions and the need for a method by which to distinguish truth and falsity. Descartes’ view is not that all our pre-reflective intuitions are mistaken. He concedes that “no sane person has ever seriously doubted” such particular claims as “that there really is a world, and that human beings have bodies” (Synopsis, AT 7:16, CSM 2:11). But such pre-reflective judgments may be ill-grounded, even when true. The dialectic of the First Meditation features a confrontation between particularism and methodism, with methodism emerging the victor. For example, the meditator (while voicing empiricist sensibilities) puts forward, as candidates for the foundations of knowledge, such prima facie obvious claims as “that I am here, sitting by the fire, wearing a winter dressing-gown, holding this piece of paper in my hands, and so on” – particular matters “about which doubt is quite impossible,” or so it would seem (AT 7:18, CSM 2:12f). In response (and at each level of the dialectic), Descartes invokes his own methodical principles to show that the prima facie obviousness of such particular claims is insufficient to meet the burden of proof. Another methodological feature of the Meditations is its first-person, meditative character. Gary Hatfield explains. Descartes’ commitment to innate ideas places him in a rationalist tradition tracing back to Plato. Knowledge of the nature of reality derives from ideas of the intellect, not the external senses. An important part of metaphysical inquiry therefore involves learning to think with the intellect. Plato’s allegory of the cave portrays this rationalist theme in terms of epistemically distinct worlds: what the senses reveal is likened to shadowy imagery on the wall of a poorly lit cave; what the intellect reveals is likened to a world of fully real beings illuminated by bright sunshine. The metaphor aptly depicts our epistemic predicament given Descartes’ own doctrines. An important function of his methods is to help would-be perfect knowers redirect their attention from the confused imagery of the senses to the luminous world of clear and distinct ideas of the intellect. Further comparisons arise with Plato’s doctrine of recollection. In the Fifth Meditation, in connection with the discovery of innate truths within, the meditator remarks: “on first discovering them it seems that I am not so much learning something new as remembering what I knew before” (Med. 5, AT 7:64, CSM 2:44). Elsewhere Descartes adds, of innate truths: The famous “wax” thought experiment of the Second Meditation is supposed to illustrate (among other things) a procedure to “dig out” what is innate. The thought experiment purports to help the meditator achieve a “purely mental scrutiny,” thereby apprehending more easily the innate idea of body. (Med. 2, AT 7:30f, CSM 2:20f) According to Descartes, our minds come stocked with a variety of intellectual concepts – ideas whose content is independent of experience. This storehouse includes ideas in mathematics, logic, and metaphysics. Interestingly, Descartes holds that even our sensory ideas involve innate content. On his understanding of the new mechanical physics, bodies have no real properties resembling our sensory ideas of colors, sounds, tastes, and the like, thus implying that the content of such ideas draws from the mind itself. But if even these sensory ideas count as innate, how then are we to characterize the doctrine of innateness? Importantly, the formation of these sensory ideas – unlike purely intellectual concepts – depends on sensory stimulation. On one plausible understanding, Descartes’ official doctrine has it that ideas are innate insofar as their content derives from the nature of the mind alone, as opposed to deriving from sense experience (cf. Newman 2006). This characterization allows that both intellectual and sensory concepts draw on native resources, though not to the same extent. Though the subject of rationalism in Descartes’ epistemology deserves careful attention, the present article generally focuses on Descartes’ efforts to achieve perfect knowledge. Relatively little attention is given to his doctrine of innateness, or, more generally, his ontology of thought. Further reading: For a contrary understanding of Descartes’ conception of scientia, see Jolley (2013). On the internalism-externalism distinction, see Alston (1989) and Plantinga (1993). For a partly externalist interpretation of Descartes, see Della Rocca (2005). For coherentist interpretations of Descartes’ project, see Frankfurt (1970), Sosa (1997a), and Della Rocca (2011); for a reply to such interpretations, see Frankfurt (1978) and Newman (2012). For a stability interpretation of Descartes, see Bennett(1990). On the full indubitability of knowledge, see Newman and Nelson (1999). On the methodism-particularism distinction, see Chisholm (1982) and Sosa (1980). On analysis and synthesis, see Smith (2010). On Descartes’ rationalism, see Adams (1975), Jolley (1990), Newman (2006), and Nelson (2007).