 By design, the constructive arguments of the Meditations unfold even though the meditator remains in doubt about being awake. This of course reinforces the ongoing theme that perfect knowledge does not properly encompass judgments of external sense. (The judgment that an external corporeal world exists is not strictly a judgment of external sense – as if knowing its existence simply by sensing it. Rather, as we’ve seen, the judgment arises from an complex inference about the possible causes of sensations.) In the closing paragraph of the Sixth Meditation, Descartes revisits the issue of dreaming. He claims to show how, in principle – even if not easily in practice – it is possible to achieve perfect knowledge that one is presently awake. A casual reading of that final paragraph might suggest that Descartes offers a naturalistic solution to the problem (i.e., a non-theistic solution), in the form of a continuity test: since continuity with past experiences holds only of waking but not dreaming, checking for the requisite continuity provides a test for ascertaining that one is awake. The following remarks can be read in this way: This naturalistic “solution” prompts two obvious criticisms, both raised by Hobbes in the Third Objections. First, the solution runs contrary to Descartes’ No Atheistic Perfect Knowledge Thesis: since the continuity test (on the naturalistic reading of it) does not invoke God, it thus appears, as Hobbes notes, “that someone can know he is awake without knowledge of the true God” (AT 7:196, CSM 2:137). Second, it seems that one could dream the requisite continuity: one could “dream that his dream fits in with his ideas of a long series of past events,” thus undermining the credibility of the continuity test (AT 7:195, CSM 2:137). Mirroring our discussion in  Section 7.2,  one kind of interpretation has Descartes relaxing his epistemic standards. He’s aware that the naturalistic solution does not stand up to methodic doubt, but he’s not attempting to overcome the Now Dreaming Doubt with perfect knowledge. A problem for this interpretation is that it doesn’t square with the following reply Descartes makes to Hobbes’ first objection: “an atheist can infer that he is awake on the basis of memory of his past life” (via the continuity test); but “he cannot know that this criterion is sufficient to give him the certainty that he is not mistaken, if he does not know that he was created by a non-deceiving God” (Replies 3, AT 7:196, CSM 2:137). Evidently, Descartes’ solution is not supposed to be available to the atheist. Taken at face value, this reply rules out a relaxed standards interpretation; it indeed rules out any interpretation involving a naturalistic solution to the problem of dreaming. On closer inspection, the Sixth Meditation passage puts forward not a naturalistic solution, but a theistic one. The meditator finally concludes that he’s awake because, as the passage explicitly reads, “God is not a deceiver” (AT 7:90, CSM 2:62). How does his argument go? Recall, in the proof of the external material world  (Section 7.2),  that Descartes mysteriously invokes the following (divinely guaranteed) truth rule: The dreaming passage looks to have Descartes again invoking this rule. The passage opens with the meditator observing the following: Referring to the worry that he’s presently dreaming as exaggerated suggests that condition (i) is met – i.e., suggests that the present circumstance includes a “natural propensity” to believe he’s awake. As such, he needs only to establish condition (ii), and he’ll have a divine guarantee of being awake. Here, notice that an important theme of the above passage concerns the meditator’s faculties for correcting sensory error – a theme suggestive of condition (ii). In context, Descartes’ appeal to the continuity test is perhaps best understood in conjunction with condition (ii). As the meditator says (speaking of his apparently waking experience): Central to the inference is the meditator’s effort to check the correctness of his belief, by means of his various faculties. The cases like these to which Descartes refers look to be those where conditions (i) and (ii) are both satisfied. Recall what Descartes writes in conjunction with the proof of the external material world: from “the very fact that God is not a deceiver” there is a “consequent impossibility of there being any falsity in my opinions which cannot be corrected by some other faculty supplied by God” (AT 7:80, CSM 2:55f). Perhaps, therefore, we can understand Descartes’ theistic solution to the Now Dreaming Doubt as building on the same rule he employs in his proof for the external material world. What about Hobbes’s other objection – in effect, that one could dream both (i) and (ii)? Descartes’ response: “A dreamer cannot really connect his dreams with the ideas of past events, though he may dream that he does. For everyone admits that a man may be deceived in his sleep.” (AT 7:196, CSM 2:137) Perhaps Descartes thinks the situation with dreaming parallels that of waking life: those who are sufficiently tired, or otherwise perceptually inattentive, “cannot really” perceive truths clearly and distinctly, though it may seem to them that they do. Whether in waking or dreaming, the Fourth Meditation theodicy has God allowing us to make judgment errors, provided that they are correctable. Descartes is committed to holding that when our perception is confused, we can in principle come to discover the confusion – even if not easily. When we lack clear and distinct perception, we are at fault (not God) for any resulting judgments, in part because we can discover that our perception is confused. Descartes needs it that the same principle holds even while dreaming. (And again, nearly the entirety of the Meditations unfolds under the supposition that, for all we know, we may presently be dreaming.) For the case at hand – i.e., the possibility of mistakenly judging that I’m awake, while in a dream – Descartes needs it that we could, in principle, discover that we’re mistaken. Apropos of condition (ii), therefore, is whether God has provided us a faculty by which to discover that we’re dreaming, on occasions when we wrongly believe ourselves to be awake. Evidently, Descartes thinks so, as he tells Gassendi: Importantly, Descartes does not say we can easily correct the mistake of dreaming that we’re awake. To the contrary, the Sixth Meditation treatment of the Now Dreaming Doubt closes with a concession that his solution is perhaps more theoretical than practical: Thus the importance of Descartes’ First Meditation remark that “no danger or error will result” from the program of methodical doubt, “because the task now in hand does not involve action” (AT 7:22, CSM 2:15). Methodical doubt should not be applied to practical matters. Prudence dictates that when making practical decisions I should assume I’m awake, even if I don’t perfectly know that I’m awake. Judgment errors made while mistakenly assuming I’m awake couldn’t have actual practical consequences, unlike those made while mistakenly assuming I’m dreaming. Further reading: See Newman (1999), Williams (1978), and Wilson (1978).