 Of his own methodology, Descartes writes: The theory whereby items of knowledge are best organized on an analogy to architecture traces back to ancient Greek thought – to Aristotle, and to work in geometry. That Descartes’ method effectively pays homage to Aristotle is, of course, welcome by his Aristotelian audience. But Descartes views Aristotle’s foundationalist principles as incomplete, at least when applied to metaphysical inquiry. His method of doubt is intended to complement foundationalism. The two methods are supposed to work in cooperation, as conveyed in the above quotation. Let’s consider each method. The central insight of foundationalism is to organize knowledge in the manner of a well-structured, architectural edifice. Such an edifice owes its structural integrity to two kinds of features: a firm foundation and a superstructure of support beams firmly anchored to the foundation. A system of justified beliefs might be organized by two analogous features: a foundation of unshakable first principles, and a superstructure of further propositions anchored to the foundation via unshakable inference. Exemplary of a foundationalist system is Euclid’s geometry. Euclid begins with a foundation of first principles – definitions, postulates, and axioms or common notions – on which he then bases a superstructure of further propositions. Descartes’ own designs for metaphysical knowledge are inspired by Euclid’s system: It would be misleading to characterize the arguments of the Meditations as unfolding straightforwardly according to geometric method (cf. Curley 2006, 31). But Descartes maintains that they can be reconstructed as such, and he expressly does so at the end of the Second Replies – providing a “geometrical” exposition of some of his central lines of argument, organized as definitions, postulates, axioms or common notions, and propositions (AT 7:160–70, CSM 2:113–120). As noted above, the Meditations contains a destructive component that Descartes likens to the architect’s preparations for laying a foundation. Though the component finds no analogue in the methods of geometers, Descartes appears to hold that it is needed in metaphysical inquiry. The discovery of Euclid’s first principles (some of them, at any rate) is comparatively unproblematic: such principles as that things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another accord not only with reason, but with the senses. In contrast, metaphysical inquiry might have first principles that conflict with the senses: Among Descartes’ persistent themes is that such preconceived opinions can obscure our mental vision of innate principles: that where there are disputes about first principles, it is not “because one man’s faculty of knowledge extends more widely than another’s, but because the common notions are in conflict with the preconceived opinions of some people who, as a result, cannot easily grasp them”; whereas, “we cannot fail to know them [innate common notions] when the occasion for thinking about them arises, provided that we are not blinded by preconceived opinions” (Prin. 1:49f, AT 8a:24, CSM 1:209). These “preconceived opinions” must be “set aside,” says Descartes, “in order to lay the first foundations of philosophy” (May 1643 letter to Voetius, AT 8b:37, CSMK 221). Otherwise, we’re apt to regard, as first principles, the mistaken (though prima facie obvious) sensory claims that particularists find attractive. Such mistakes in the laying of the foundations weaken the entire edifice. Descartes adds: Though foundationalism brilliantly allows for the expansion of knowledge from first principles, Descartes thinks that a complementary method is needed to help us discover genuine first principles. As Hatfield writes, “the problem is not to carry out proofs (which might well be assented to, given the definitions and axioms), but to discover the axioms themselves (which are hopelessly obscured by the prejudices of the senses)” (1986, 71). Descartes therefore devises the method of doubt for this purpose – a method to help “set aside” preconceived opinions. Descartes opens the First Meditation asserting the need “to demolish everything completely and start again right from the foundations” (AT 7:17, CSM 2:12). The passage adds: In the architectural analogy, we can think of bulldozers as the ground clearing tools of demolition. For knowledge building, Descartes construes sceptical doubts as the ground clearing tools of epistemic demolition. Bulldozers undermine literal ground; doubt undermines epistemic ground. Using sceptical doubts, the meditator shows how to find “some reason for doubt” in all his preexisting claims to knowledge. The ultimate aim of the method is constructive. Unlike “the sceptics, who doubt only for the sake of doubting,” Descartes aims “to reach certainty – to cast aside the loose earth and sand so as to come upon rock or clay” (Discourse 3, AT 6:29, CSM 1:125). Bulldozers are typically used for destructive ends, as are sceptical doubts. Descartes’ methodical innovation is to employ demolition for constructive ends. Where a bulldozer’s force overpowers the ground, its effects are destructive. Where the ground’s firmness resists the bulldozer’s force, the bulldozer might be used constructively – using it to reveal the ground as firm. Descartes thus uses sceptical doubts to test the firmness of candidates put forward for the foundations of knowledge. According to at least one prominent critic, this employment of sceptical doubt is unnecessary and excessive. Writes Gassendi: Here, Gassendi singles out two features of methodical doubt – its universal and hyperbolic character. In reply, Descartes remarks: Evidently, Descartes holds that the universal and hyperbolic character of methodical doubt is helpful to its success. Further appeal to the architectural analogy helps elucidate why. Consider first the universal character of doubt – the need “to demolish everything completely and start again right from the foundations.” The point is not merely to apply doubt to all candidates for perfect knowledge, but to apply doubt collectively. Descartes offers the following analogy: That even one falsehood would be mistakenly treated as a genuine first principle – say, the belief that the senses are reliable, or that ancient authorities should be trusted – threatens to spread falsehood to other beliefs in the system. A collective doubt helps avoid such mistakes. It ensures that the method only approves candidate first principles that are unshakable in their own right: it rules out that the appearance of unshakability is owed to logical relations with other principles, themselves not subjected to doubt. How is the hyperbolic character of methodical doubt supposed to contribute to the method’s success? The architectural analogy is again helpful. Suppose that an architect is vigilant in employing a universal/collective doubt. Suppose, further, that she attempts to use bulldozers for constructive purposes. A problem nonetheless arises. How big a bulldozer is she to use? A light-duty bulldozer might be unable to distinguish a medium-sized boulder, and immovable bedrock. In both cases, the ground would appear immovable. Descartes takes the solution to lie in using not light-duty, but heavy-duty tools of demolition – the bigger the bulldozer, the better. The lesson is clear for the epistemic builder: the more hyperbolic the doubt, the better. A potential problem remains. Does not the problem of the “light-duty bulldozer” repeat itself? No matter how firm one’s ground, might it not be dislodged in the face of a yet bigger bulldozer? This raises the worry that there might not be unshakable ground, as opposed to ground which is yet unshaken. Descartes’ goal of utterly indubitable epistemic ground may simply be elusive. Perhaps the architectural analogy breaks down in a manner that serves Descartes well. For though there is no most-powerful literal bulldozer, perhaps epistemic bulldozing is not subject to this limitation. Descartes seems to think that there is a most-powerful doubt – a doubt than which none more hyperbolic can be conceived. The Evil Genius Doubt (and equivalent doubts) is supposed to fit the bill. If the method reveals epistemic ground that stands fast in the face of a doubt this hyperbolic, then, as Descartes seems to hold, this counts as epistemic bedrock if anything does. Hence the importance of the universal and hyperbolic character of the method of doubt. Gassendi’s suggestion that we forego methodical doubt in favor of a “simple and brief statement to the effect that [we’re] regarding [our] previous knowledge as uncertain” misses the intended point of the method. Descartes’ method of doubt has been subject to numerous objections – some fair, others less so. Rendered in the terms Descartes himself employs, the method is arguably less flawed than its reputation. Let us consider some of the common objections. Two such objections are suggested in a passage from the pragmatist Peirce: Note, however, that the procedure of the Meditations is not that universal doubt is supposed to flow simply from adherence to a maxim; to the contrary, the doubt is supposed to flow from careful attention to positive reasons for doubt – recall the express resolution to find “at least some reason for doubt” in one’s prior opinions. Descartes introduces sceptical arguments precisely in acknowledgement that we need such reasons: A second objection is suggested by Peirce’s reference to a “doubt in our hearts.” Here, we should distinguish two kinds of doubt, in terms of two kinds of ways that doubt can defeat knowledge. Some doubts purport to undermine one’s conviction or belief – call these ‘belief-defeating’ doubts. Other doubts purport to undermine one’s justification (whether or not they undermine belief) – call these ‘justification-defeating’ doubts. What Peirce calls a ‘doubt in our hearts’ is strongly suggestive of a belief-defeating doubt. Is Peirce therefore right that only belief-defeating doubts can undermine knowledge? Longstanding traditions in philosophy acknowledge that there may be truths we believe in our hearts (as it were), but which we do not know. This is one of the intended lessons of methodical doubt. The sceptical scenarios are supposed to help us appreciate that though we believe that 2+3=5, and believe that we’re awake, and believe there’s an external world, we may nonetheless lack perfect knowledge. As already noted, Descartes writes of external world doubt that “no sane person has ever seriously doubted” such matters – a remark perhaps best understood in terms of belief-defeating doubt. Justification-defeating doubts are sufficient to undermine perfect knowledge, and this is the sort of doubt put forward in the First Meditation. A related objection has the method calling not merely for doubt, but for disbelief or dissent. One of Gassendi’s objections reads in this manner. He seems to take Descartes to be urging us, quite literally, to “consider everything as false,” a strategy which, as he says to Descartes, “made it necessary for you to convince yourself” of the sceptical hypotheses. Based on Descartes’ most careful statements, however, his method does not require a dissent from the statements it undermines. Rather, the method urges us to “hold back [our] assent from opinions which are not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as [we] do from those which are patently false” (Med. 1, AT 7:18, CSM 2:12, cf. AT 7:461). Finally, a common objection has it that the universality of doubt undermines the method of doubt itself, since, for example, the sceptical hypotheses themselves are dubious. Descartes thinks this misses the point of the method: namely, to extend doubt universally to candidates for knowledge, but not also to the very tools for founding knowledge. As he concedes: “there may be reasons which are strong enough to compel us to doubt, even though these reasons are themselves doubtful, and hence are not to be retained later on” (Replies 7, AT 7:473f, CSM 2:319). Further reading: On foundationalism: for Descartes’ treatment, see Discourse, First Meditation, and Seventh Objections and Replies; for its treatment by ancients, see Euclid (1956) and Aristotle (Posterior Analytics); by interpreters of Descartes, see Sosa (1997a) and Van Cleve (1979). On Cartesian inference, see Gaukroger (1989) and Hacking (1980). On methodical doubt: for Descartes’ treatment, see Rules, Discourse, First Meditation, and Seventh Replies; by commentators, see Frankfurt (1970), Garber (1986), Larmore (2014), Newman (2006), Williams (1983), and Wilson (1978). On needing reasons for doubt (contrary to direct voluntarism), see Newman (2007). On the analysis-synthesis distinction (closely related to issues of doubt and methodology): see the Second Replies (AT 7:155ff); see also Arnauld (1964, 4:2f), Curley (1986), Galileo (1967, 50f), Hintikka (1978), and Newman (2019).