 Epistemological solutions to PEW deny one or more of its explicitly epistemological premises. They try to make that denial plausible and to situate it within a larger epistemology of perception and a larger epistemology more generally. Foundationalism is the view that some beliefs are epistemologically basic—i.e., their justification does not depend on evidential support from other beliefs—and all other beliefs ultimately derive their justification from basic beliefs. (Basically justified beliefs are sometimes referred to as “immediately justified” or “directly justified” as well.) Classical foundationalism is the view that (i) it is appearance beliefs—i.e., beliefs about perceptual appearances—that are basic, and perceptual beliefs about ordinary objects are based at least partly on these, and (ii) perceptual justification requires us to have good reason to think that the relevant current appearances are veridical. Basing is a relation of epistemic dependence and does not imply explicit inference, although particular theories might hold that the relation is satisfied only when inference occurs. (i) is defended in one of several ways. Here are brief versions of some of the more common, often implicit, arguments: (ii) includes an endorsement of the Metaevidential Principle. We have looked at representative realism as one motivation for that principle, but there are others. Classical foundationalists have traditionally endorsed it because it follows from two other claims they find plausible. The first is (i) above, that our perceptual beliefs are based on appearance beliefs. The second is the claim that in order to be justified in believing hypothesis h on the basis of evidence e, one must be justified in believing that e makes h probable (or that e entails h, or e is good evidence for h, etc.) This second claim is a version of Richard Fumerton’s “Principle of Inferential Justification” and is often defended by citing examples (Fumerton 1995; see the entry on   foundationalist theories of justification).  My belief that you’re going to die soon cannot be justified on the basis of your tarot card reading unless I’m justified in believing that tarot cards really do tell the future. Whether such examples generalize to all inferences is an open question. Some fairly strong though controversial forms of internalism (see the entry on  internalist vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification)  would imply the Principle of Inferential Justification as well. The classical foundationalist avoids skepticism by rejecting the Reasons Claim, insisting that we do often have good, non-viciously-circular, reasons for thinking that our experiences are veridical. Two questions thus arise for classical foundationalism, one about the nature and justification of appearance beliefs and one about the allegedly non-circular inference from appearance beliefs to perceptual beliefs. Appearance beliefs are said not to be based on other beliefs. This raises the question of how they are themselves justified. Appearance beliefs are a species of introspective belief, and introspection is sometimes thought to involve a “direct contact”, or “confrontation”, or “acquaintance with”, or “access to”, or “self-presentation” of certain truths. As we saw in  section 2.1,  regarding “direct presence”, such metaphors could be unpacked in a variety of ways. If claims about “acquaintance” and the like (for simplicity, I will refer to them all indiscriminately as “acquaintance”) are given an epistemological reading, then they seem to restate or reiterate the classical foundationalist’s claim that we can have foundational justification for appearance beliefs, rather than to explain or argue for that claim. If they are making some metaphysical claim, then the consequences for epistemology are indirect and unclear. Epistemologists are sometimes less than fully explicit about how they are understanding acquaintance. And however acquaintance is understood, the classical foundationalist must make acquaintance broad enough that we are plausibly acquainted with appearances but narrow enough that we are not acquainted with physical objects as well. Roderick Chisholm’s (1977) conception of acquaintance (he calls it “self-presentation”) is explicitly and fundamentally epistemic—a self-presenting state is simply one such that a person is justified in believing she is in it whenever she is actually in it. This doesn’t explain or argue for the special epistemic status of appearance beliefs, but Chisholm denies that this needs to be argued: it is self-presenting that appearance beliefs are self-presenting. In a somewhat similar vein, Fumerton (1995, 2001) claims that the acquaintance relation is not an epistemic relation but insists that it is sui generis and unanalyzable; he holds that we nevertheless understand the acquaintance relation, as we are acquainted with it. Attempts to explicate acquaintance in non-epistemic terms fall into one of two categories. The traditional way to understand acquaintance is in terms of a containment relation between appearance beliefs and appearances, with the result that appearance beliefs entail their own truth. This is the indirect realist’s analogue of the world-involvement invoked by direct realists (above, sections  2.1.4,  2.3.3). Descartes (1641) held that appearance beliefs, like any belief about one’s own mental states, are infallible for this reason and thereby self-evident (and thus justified). Though some still endorse this view (McGrew 2003), most epistemologists deny that we are infallible in our self-attributions. A more modest claim is that only some appearance beliefs are infallible. David Chalmers (2003) argues that phenomenal qualities are literally elements or constituents of a special type of phenomenal concept (“direct phenomenal concepts”), and so introspective judgments that involve the application of such concepts cannot be mistaken. This does not yet account for the distinctive epistemic status of appearance beliefs, as the epistemic implications of infallibility remain unclear, especially in the context of an internalist epistemology. One might believe some necessary truth as the result of a lucky guess; the belief is infallible, but not justified. This seems at least in part to result from the fact that the infallibility occurs, in some sense, outside of the agent’s perspective. (The infallibility involved in self-attribution, however, seems intuitively to fall within the agent’s perspective.) The second type of approach views appearance beliefs as justified by something extrinsic to them, so that an appearance belief is justified when it is accompanied by acquaintance with the experiential fact that the appearance belief describes. Laurence BonJour (2003), for example, understands acquaintance in terms of constitutivity, though in a very different way from Chalmers. BonJour claims that awareness of the sensory content of an experience is partly constitutive of what it is to have a conscious experience. That awareness is thus infallible, but appearance beliefs—which purport to describe the experience and constituent awareness—are fallible. All the authors just mentioned, except for Chisholm, see acquaintance as a metaphysical (i.e., non-epistemic) relation that does not immediately entail any epistemological theses. They lay down as a separate, further thesis one that is not entailed by but is rendered highly plausible, they think, by the nature of the acquaintance relation: that when one is thus acquainted with an experience, one has a strong prima facie justification to believe that one has that experience, and furthermore, that justification does not depend on any other beliefs. On either non-epistemic understanding of acquaintance, it puts us in a very good position to make correct judgments about our current experiences. Most classical foundationalists allow that all appearance beliefs are defeasible (i.e., having a kind of justification that is capable of being overridden or undermined by further reasons); hence the claim made is merely for prima facie, rather than ultima facie, justification. (To say that a belief is prima facie [aka pro tanto] justified is to say that it is has some positive epistemic status, in the sense that it is justified if it is not defeated by overriding or undermining considerations.) Chisholm (1977) and Timothy McGrew (2003) endorse the stronger claim that acquaintance provides indefeasible, ultima facie justification. It is possible that the experience (or acquaintance with it) is intended to serve not only as a truth-maker and justifier for the appearance belief, but as evidence for that belief as well. By “evidence” is meant here not just any factor that serves to confer justification on a belief, but something that serves as a ground, or reason, or rational basis, for that  belief.[2]  Not all justification-conferring or justification-relevant factors count as evidence in this sense (if they did, Earl Conee and Richard Feldman [2004] would not have to defend evidentialism). For example, Descartes held that all clear and distinct judgments were justified, though certain judgments—e.g., “I think”—are justified without evidential appeal to clarity and distinctness. It is the fact that it is clear and distinct that makes it justified, not the agent’s awareness of that fact or appreciation of that fact’s epistemic significance, so clarity and distinctness are not functioning here as evidence. Similarly, reliabilism holds, roughly, that being reliably formed renders a belief justified; although reliability need not—and typically does not—figure in as the agent’s evidence or grounds for believing something. Thus, one can claim that perceptual experiences are nondoxastic (i.e., non-belief) states that serve as evidence for appearance beliefs, in much the way that beliefs serve as evidence for other beliefs, though with one crucial difference: for one belief to serve as evidence for another, the former must be justified; experiences are not susceptible to justification, thus can be neither justified nor unjustified, but—on this view—can nevertheless serve as evidence and confer justification on beliefs. The justification of appearance beliefs would then depend on evidential connections to other mental states but not to other beliefs, and because experiences need not be justified in order to serve as evidence, the threatened regress is halted in a way that is consistent with foundationalism. The idea of such nondoxastic evidence raises several problems, as we will see shortly. Classical foundationalism is sometimes objected to on the grounds that we typically do not have beliefs about our experiences (e.g., Pollock 1986, Greco 2000). This raises interesting and difficult issues about the natures of evidence and the basing relation. For the belief that p to serve as justifying evidence for the belief that q, must I consciously form the belief that p, or is it enough that, e.g., I have good reason to believe that p? Surely the classical foundationalist never denied phenomenal directness or thought our perceptual beliefs were reasoned out explicitly. If one could show that only consciously formed beliefs could ground other beliefs, this would be bad news indeed for classical foundationalism, but this is a controversial claim. Alternatively, the objection might be that we are typically not even yet in a position to form justified appearance beliefs, in some situations where we are already quite justified in our perceptual beliefs. Being in a position to form justified appearance beliefs would require further investigation, in an “inward” direction. This investigation is not always easy (Pollock 1986), and it is possible that such investigation would alter the nature of the experience. In addition, some perceivers may lack the conceptual resources to distinguish appearances from external objects, although they seem to be justified in their perceptual beliefs nonetheless. Cartesian foundationalism was the strictest form of classical foundationalism, requiring a deductive metaevidential argument for the reliability of perception. Descartes believed that he could give a non-circular argument for thinking that some perceptual experiences were veridical, by constructing an a priori argument for the reliability of perception. He also aimed for certainty, so his argument was a deductive one, starting with the existence and perfection of God and concluding that any clear and distinct awareness (including elements of perceptual awarenesses) must be true; so some perceptual experiences—namely, the clear and distinct ones—are veridical. This would have licensed a rejection of the Reasons Claim, by showing how we could have a good reason for thinking our experiences to be veridical. However, Descartes’s a priori arguments for the existence of God were at best controversial, and the theology needed to deduce the reliability of perception from the perfection of the deity was unconvincing, so deductive metaevidential arguments along these lines were not pursued further. NonCartesian forms of classical foundationalism have tried to combine the a priority required by non-circularity with a probabilistic form of inference, the most promising candidate being abduction, or inference to the best explanation (Russell 1912, BonJour 2003). According to this view, the best explanation of our experiences is the commonsense hypothesis that there is a mind-independent external world that conforms in some measure to these experiences and is the cause of them. The superiority of this explanation to the alternatives (idealism, a Cartesian demon, etc.) is held to be an a priori matter, thus not dependent on assuming the veridicality of the very experiences the argument is supposed to legitimate. There is a good deal of intuitive plausibility to the claim that an external world serves as the best explanation for our sense experience, but making that case in any detail, especially enough to satisfy the idealist, would require taking on some large and complex issues, like what makes one explanation better than another  (see they entry on abduction),  and—since the commonsense view is sometimes (e.g., Russell 1912, BonJour 2010) held to be simpler than competitors—what counts as simplicity, a vexed question in the philosophy of science  (see the entry on  simplicity).  William Alston (1993) offers an influential critique of abductive arguments for the reliability of sense-experience. Furthermore, if we are trying to explain how the ordinary person’s perceptual beliefs are justified, then it is not enough that there be some good deductive or abductive argument for the reliability of perception; this argument must be in some important sense available to or possessed by the agent. Premise  (2)  of PEW, after all, is the claim that the agent must have some good reason for thinking her experiences are veridical. Some (e.g., Pollock & Cruz 1999) think this imposes a significantly more onerous burden on the proponent of classical foundationalism, although others (e.g., BonJour 2010) claim that the superiority of the commonsense view is quite accessible to ordinary epistemic agents. Other foundationalists have responded to PEW by denying the Metaevidential Principle. Most such views have rejected both parts of the standard argument for the Metaevidential Principle  (3.1  above), but one important exception is worth noting. Chisholm (1966, 1977) agrees with the classical foundationalist that perceptual beliefs are based on appearance beliefs but denies that any argument for the legitimacy of the appearance-reality inference is needed. Chisholm posits as a fundamental epistemic principle that if one is justified in believing herself to be perceptually appeared to as if p, then one is prima facie justified in believing that p. The significance of insisting that this principle is fundamental is to insist on the legitimacy of the move from p-appearance to p-reality while denying that that legitimacy is derived from deduction or abduction. To the classical foundationalist, this move seems illicitly ad hoc. Admittedly, it gives the answer we desire—that perceptual beliefs are justified—but it doesn’t explain how this can be so or give us any reason to think it is true (Fumerton 1995). The objection holds that the postulation of fundamental epistemic principles licensing the inferences we like, despite our inability to provide an argument for the legitimacy of such inferences, has, to use Bertrand Russell’s apt phrase, all the advantages of theft over honest toil. The coherentist, like the classical foundationalist, endorses the Metaevidential Principle but holds that we can indeed have good arguments for the reliability of perception. Coherentism is the view that at least some justification comes from mutual support among otherwise unsupported beliefs instead of tracing back to basic beliefs. As such, coherentists are sometimes said to endorse certain kinds of circular (they prefer to call them holistic) argument, but a coherentist will reject the Reasons Claim by insisting that there is nothing viciously circular about our arguments for the reliability of perception (BonJour 1985, Lehrer 1990). Because it allows mutual support, coherentism can tolerate empirical arguments for the reliability of perception, in principle, allowing appeals to track records, evolution, and other scientific evidence. Coherentism has traditionally been propounded as a doxastic theory: one that holds that only beliefs can serve as evidence. This is in part because one of the major motivations for coherentism derives from an argument due to Wilfrid Sellars (1956), Donald Davidson (1986) and Laurence BonJour (1980) that purports to show that nondoxastic states (e.g., experiences) cannot play an evidential role (about which, more below, in  section 3.4.1).  This doxasticism is the source of one of the most notorious problems for coherentism, however, for the internal coherence of a belief system could result from the ingenuity of the believer, rather than from its fit with reality. A detailed enough and cleverly constructed fairy tale could be highly internally coherent, but surely I am not justified in believing the fairy tale, in my current situation and environment. This is the famous isolation objection to coherentism: a belief system could be isolated from the world and yet be fully coherent. Since those beliefs would not be justified, coherence is not sufficient for justification. The brunt of the isolation objection is that (doxastic) coherentism is unable to do justice to perception, for it does not require any genuinely perceptual contact with the world. But without perception, the whole of one’s beliefs is just another plausible story, not the one true description of things. (Even with perception, there is unlikely to be a single best belief set, but the number of equally good contenders will be vastly reduced.) For some time, BonJour (1985) thought that the problem could be solved with more beliefs; he required a candidate belief system to include a number of beliefs attributing reliability to beliefs that seem to be involuntary, noninferential, and directly caused by the outside world. But this solution seemed ad hoc, and it still didn’t require the belief set to be very highly constrained by perception; at best it constrained the belief set by what the agent believes to be perception, and even then, only those putatively perceptual beliefs about which she has favorable metabeliefs would need to constrain the rest of the system in any way. This seems to render perception epistemically “optional”, in an objectionable way. Although BonJour (1997) has consequently abandoned this approach in favor of a form of foundationalism, others have sought to incorporate experiences into a nondoxastic coherentism (Conee 1988, Haack 1993, Kvanvig 2012, Kvanvig & Riggs 1992). If experiences are among the relata over which the coherence relation is defined, then a fully isolated agent won’t be able to satisfy the coherence requirement, and the isolation objection may be averted. It is unclear whether such a move genuinely rescues coherentism or simply replaces it with a version of foundationalism. If consonance with experience can increase the credibility of a belief, then it begins to look as if that belief satisfies at least some (“weak”) foundationalist definitions of an epistemologically basic belief. Instead, the nondoxastic coherentist might insist that experiences justify perceptual beliefs, but only in the presence of the right background beliefs about which experiences reliably indicate which distal states of affairs, where these background beliefs are themselves justified in a coherentist manner (Gupta 2006). This view seems to be securely coherentist, though it threatens to render coherence with experience optional in just the way BonJour’s older view did. The crucial question here is whether experiences—alone, and in and of themselves—affect the coherence of a belief system, or whether they do so only in the presence of the relevant metabeliefs. If the former, then “nondoxastic coherentism” may not be significantly different from some form of foundationalism. If the latter, then an agent lacking the requisite metabeliefs might satisfy the coherence requirements quite well but have a belief system that clashes with her experience, and the nondoxastic coherentist would have to hold that she is none the worse, epistemically, for that fact. The very spirit of coherentism seems to dictate that perception yields justification only because and insofar as the perceiver has metabeliefs that favor perception, while it is central to the foundationalist theory of perception that perceptual experience imposes epistemic constraints on us, whether we believe it or not. The epistemological views considered so far can all be considered egoistic theories, for they hold that justification for beliefs about external objects depends in part on justification for beliefs about oneself—about one’s current mental states, about the connections between one’s experiences or putatively perceptual beliefs and certain distal states of affairs, rendering perceptual beliefs nonbasic. Modest foundationalism is a nonegoistic version of foundationalism, one that allows some beliefs about external objects and their properties—particularly, perceptual beliefs—to be epistemologically basic. (Both types of foundationalism also countenance other basic beliefs, e.g., beliefs about simple arithmetical truths.) Modest foundationalism thus denies the Metaevidential Principle; perceptual beliefs are not based on other beliefs and thus not based on appearance beliefs, and if they are based on something other than beliefs (namely, experiences) the agent need not have a justified belief about the reliability of this connection. Some proponents of modest foundationalism go a step further and offer a derivative denial of the Reasons Claim: since we already have justified beliefs about our surroundings, and introspective knowledge of the deliverances of perception, we can construct non-circular arguments for the reliability of perception. Indeed, if I can have first-order knowledge about the world around me without first having metaevidence about the reliability of perception, I should be able to accumulate empirical evidence for thinking that I am not a brain in a vat, that I am not dreaming, etc., without begging the question. Whether this should count as a virtue or a vice of the theory is a matter of debate. Proponents of a “Moorean” response to skepticism (see the entries on  skepticism  and  epistemic closure)  will see this as a selling point for modest foundationalism (Pryor 2000). Others (Vogel 2000, 2008; Cohen 2002) have interpreted this result as revealing a fundamental flaw of the theory: it makes justification and knowledge “too easy”. It is as if I used an untested speedometer to form beliefs both about my speed and what the meter indicated my speed to be, then used a number of such belief pairs to inductively argue for the reliability of the speedometer. Modest foundationalism endorses epistemological directness  (section 2.1.5  above) and could be considered a kind of epistemological direct realism, for it makes the world and its elements “directly present” to the mind in a fairly clear, epistemological sense: perceptual justification is not dependent on any other justification; no other beliefs are interposed between us and the world (in fact, John Pollock’s term for his [1986] modest foundationalism is “direct realism”; cf. Pollock & Cruz 1999). Modest foundationalism is compatible with any metaphysical view about the nature of perception. Even a sense-datum theorist could embrace this epistemological direct realism, provided she held that the inference from sense-data to external objects was a kind of (perhaps unconscious or subpersonal) inference that does not impose evidential requirements on the conclusion belief. Modest foundationalism is usually associated with the internalist versions of the theory. Roughly, epistemological internalism is the claim that the factors that determine justification supervene on the mental states of the cognizer (mentalism) or can be determined to obtain by mere reflection (access internalism; see the entry on  internalist vs. externalist conceptions of epistemic justification).  Internalist modest foundationalist theories hold that perceptual beliefs are directly justified by the corresponding perceptual experiences; it is the experiences themselves, rather than beliefs about the experiences, that do the justificatory work. The most straightforward version is one that holds that having a certain experience is by itself sufficient for prima facie justification for the corresponding perceptual belief. Michael Huemer’s (2007) “phenomenal conservatism”, James Pryor’s (2000) “dogmatism”, and Pollock’s (1974, 1986) “direct realism” all endorse something like the following principle: If S has a perceptual experience as of p, then S is prima facie justified in believing that p. That is, S is prima facie justified whether or not perception is reliable for S and whether or not S has any evidence in favor of the claim that perception is reliable. Perceptual beliefs are justified by the experience alone, in virtue of some intrinsic feature of that experience (its content, or phenomenal character, or assertive force, etc.). Of course, because the justification here is only prima facie justification, this justification could be defeated if, say, S has good enough reason to think that perception is unreliable, or has independent evidence that p is false. To have a neutral term, I call this view “seemings internalism”, for it holds that perceptual beliefs are based on “seemings”, i.e., appearance states, i.e., experiences. (There is no fixed, established terminology here, so I will use these terms interchangeably.) Perhaps the most important problem for this view concerns the relevant understanding of seemings, or perceptual experience. It is clear that seemings must be non-belief states of some sort, as their epistemological role is to confer justification on basic beliefs, and the latter wouldn’t be basic if seemings were themselves beliefs. The “Sellarsian dilemma” is a famous argument, due perhaps as much to BonJour (1978, 1985) as to Sellars (1956), which claims that “experience” and “seemings” and the like are ambiguous in a way that undermines the epistemological role foundationalism requires of experiences. That role, of course, is to provide justification for beliefs without being themselves in need of it. (Sellars’s original argument is aimed at classical foundationalism, but I discuss it here, because it threatens any theory that has experiences justifying beliefs—by themselves and in the absence of background beliefs—and because most recent discussion of the Sellarsian dilemma occurs within the context of seemings internalism.) According to Sellars (1956), there is a kind of awareness of sensations that does not involve learning or the application of concepts, but this kind of awareness does not account for the justification of our appearance beliefs; one might well have this kind of awareness without having any idea what kind of experiences one is having (or any idea that there are such things as experiences!). There is another kind of awareness of our sensations that does involve the application of concepts and does entail knowledge and justification. But this awareness just is one’s knowledge of one’s experiences (i.e., one’s justified, true, unGettiered appearance belief). But that kind of awareness cannot then serve as a nondoxastic foundation that confers justification on beliefs without being itself in need of justification. Sellars himself (1956) thought that there are two elements to perception: a bare sensation, which is an inner event with qualitative character but no representational content; and a perceptual belief (or belief-like state, in cases where the agent does not accept appearances at face value; see Reid 1764, 1785 for a similar view). Recent formulations of the Sellarsian dilemma have focused on this mismatch in content between experience and perceptual belief. There are several variants of the argument; what follows is an amalgamated version. In defense of  (2),  experiences have frequently been construed as lacking representational contents altogether (Sellars 1956, Martin 2002, Brewer 2011), or as having nonconceptual contents (Heck 2000, Peacocke 2001).[4]  An influential argument (e.g., McDowell 1994, Brewer 1999) holds that without conceptual content, an experience would have to stand outside the “logical space of reasons” and thus cannot justify a belief. This line is perhaps most plausible if the relevant mode of justification is assumed to be a specifically evidential one (see  section 3.1.1  above). To serve as evidence, the experience would need to stand in logical or probabilistic relations to beliefs, and without (conceptual) contents, it is unclear how it could stand in evidential relations to beliefs, or which beliefs it would serve as evidence for (McDowell 1994). A common response is that as long as experiences have contents of any sort, they can have truth conditions and thus stand in entailment and probabilistic relations to beliefs (Heck 2000, Byrne 2005). One way to follow through on the original argument for  (2)  is to emphasize the kind of content necessary for evidence appreciable as such by the perceiver. If experiences are nonconceptual, then it seems that I could have a nonconceptual experience of a cat without being in any position to appreciate the fact that the experience is in fact of a cat. In such a case, I could fail to have any justification for believing that there is cat in front of me. So nonconceptual experiences cannot, by themselves, justify perceptual beliefs (Lyons 2016). Such an argument requires the controversial assumption that an agent must “appreciate” e’s evidential significance vis-à-vis h, in order for e to supply that agent with evidence for h. Some (e.g., Alston 1988) have explicitly rejected this assumption. As for the other horn of the dilemma, premise  (3),  one can argue that so-called “experiences” that have assertive force and the same contents as beliefs are, if not themselves beliefs, at least sufficiently belief-like that they are susceptible to epistemic evaluation in much the way that beliefs are; if so and if only the “justified” ones can confer justification on beliefs, then these experiences will not have filled the role foundationalism had carved out for them (Sellars 1956, BonJour 1978, Sosa 2007). In recent years, several authors (Lyons 2005, 2009; Bengson, Grube, & Korman 2011; Brogaard 2013) have argued that what we think of as perceptual experiences is actually a composite of two (or more) distinct elements, what Chris Tucker (2010) calls the “sensation” (an imagistic state, rich in perceptual phenomenology) and a “seeming” (here construed as a purely representational state, applying conceptual categories to things in the world). Seemings understood in this way are still non-belief states: in cases of known perceptual illusion, it might seem to me that p, even though I don’t believe that p. Something like the above Sellarsian dilemma can be run with this distinction in hand: sensations without seemings are insufficient to justify beliefs; and seemings without sensations would be subjectively too similar to mere hunches to justify beliefs (Lyons 2009). The seemings internalist can reply by arguing that seemings alone, even construed as just one component of perceptual experience, can indeed justify beliefs (Tucker 2010), or by rejecting this composite view, insisting that a seeming is a single, unified state, whose perceptual phenomenology and conceptual content are inextricably linked (Chudnoff & Didomenico 2015). Seemings internalism as formulated above claims that the content of the experience is the same as the content of the belief, thus rejecting premise  (3)  of the Sellarsian argument. There may be variations close enough to still count as seemings internalism that deny  (2)  instead, allowing experiences with nonconceptual contents to justify beliefs. The standard schema would have to be modified: If S has a perceptual experience as of p*, then S is prima facie justified in believing that p. One would, of course, want to say more about the relation between p and p*. Although his concern is not with nonconceptual content, Nico Silins (2011) defends a view much like seemings internalism, where the experiences are not required to have the same contents as the beliefs. A second problem is that of alien sense modalities (Bergmann 2006). There are possible creatures with sense modalities and experiences that are foreign to us: echolocation, electeroception, etc. If metaevidential beliefs are not necessary for perceptual justification, then these same experiences ought to justify us in those same beliefs. Intuitively, however, a sudden electeroceptive experience would not justify me in believing there was a medium sized animal about three feet behind me. In fact, a famous objection that is normally pressed against reliabilist theories seems to apply equally well to seemings internalism. Norman (BonJour 1980) has no reason for thinking that he has clairvoyant powers, but one day he has a clairvoyant experience as of the president being in New York; intuitively, he is not prima facie justified in believing that the president is in New York, yet seemings internalism seems to imply that he is. One might argue that Norman’s experience is not exactly perceptual; perhaps this might offer a way out. Some versions of seemings internalism restrict their claims to perception (Pryor 2000), although some (Huemer 2007) apply to seemings much more generally. Another potential problem is that seemings internalism is insensitive to the etiology of the experience, where it intuitively seems that this should matter. If the only reason Jack looks angry to Jill is that she has an irrational fear that he would be angry, then her perceptual experience as of angry-Jack should not carry its usual evidential weight (Siegel 2011). In general, experiences that result from wishful thinking, fear, and various irrational processes should not have the same evidential import as do experiences with a more respectable etiology (Siegel 2013). But seemings internalism makes the experience itself sufficient for (prima facie) justification and thus leaves no role for etiology to play. One response to these sorts of cases is that if it genuinely looks to Jill as if Jack is angry, then the only appropriate thing for Jill to do is believe that he is angry (Huemer 2013). This is compatible with there still being something else epistemically wrong with Jill; e.g., she presumably doesn’t know that Jack is angry (even if he is). A question that arises for any epistemology of perception but that is more salient for seemings internalism concerns which perceptual beliefs are epistemologically basic. Is my belief that there’s a dog in front of me basic, or does its justification depend on the justification of more elemental beliefs: that there’s a medium sized, 3-dimensional object of such-and-such a shape and a furry texture, etc.? Is my belief that that’s Django on the floor in front of me basic, or does it depend on the beliefs that there’s a black and tan dog of a certain description, and that Django is a black and tan dog who fits that description, etc.? One reason this matters, especially for the present views, is that it is closely linked to separate issues concerning the contents of perception  (see the entry on the    contents of perception).  If I can have the basic perceptual belief that Django the dog is here in front of me, then does this mean that I must be capable of having a perceptual experience with the content that Django is in front of me? A final worry for seemings internalism is one that we encountered above in  section 3.2:  the proposal seems to be an ad hoc attempt to get the desired nonskeptical answer without further justification for the  principle.[5] There is a nonstandard form of internalist modest foundationalism that might be able to solve some of these problems by finding a distinctive role for background knowledge to play. Peter Markie (2006) suggests that background knowledge of how to form perceptual beliefs can determine which experiences count as evidence for which beliefs. If this background served as evidence, the view in question would no longer be a modest foundationalism. Markie, however, understands this know-how entirely in nondoxastic terms—in terms of behavioral dispositions. This presumably keeps it from serving as evidence, although the know-how is mental and available to introspection, which renders the theory internalist. On this view, the content of perceptual experiences would not matter, for their status as evidence is not supposed to be determined entirely by the nature of themselves and their justificanda. This view does, however, flout the intuitively plausible, though controversial, principle of evidence essentialism, which holds that if e is evidence of h for S, then necessarily, e is evidence of h for any S (Lyons 2009; Pollock 1986 calls the principle “cognitive essentialism” and Conee & Feldman 2004 call it “strong supervenience”). It also violates the plausible and less controversial claim that evidential relations are objective (Bergmann 2004), i.e., that the agent’s subjective sense of evidential fit is insufficient for genuine fit. Seemings internalism employs a conception of seemings that is neutral between hallucination and veridical perception. The view thus holds that our epistemic status is the same in both cases, as do coherentism and classical foundationalism. The epistemological disjunctivist, on the other hand, holds that we are more justified in the good case (perhaps significantly more justified). The debate between epistemological disjunctivists is actually orthogonal to the debates between foundationalism and coherentism. The disjunctivist need not endorse modest foundationalism and hold that perceptual beliefs are basic. I discuss the theory here under the heading of modest foundationalism, because proponents of epistemological disjunctivists have typically embraced a version of modest foundationalism, at least with respect to perception. Epistemological disjunctivism fits naturally with metaphysical disjunctivism, although neither implies the other. The proponent of both can claim that the reason we are justified in the good case but not in the bad is that a veridical perceptual experience is a distinct type of mental state from a hallucination and that different types of mental states frequently have different evidential significance. An epistemological disjunctivist who denied metaphysical disjunctivism would claim that we are in the same mental state in both cases but that the justificatory potency of an experiential state is partly determined by further factors, including the veridicality or not of the experience. On the standard mentalist understanding of internalism, the latter view is clearly externalist; the former view might count as internalist, at least on a rather unusually liberal understanding of internalism, which allows the supervenience base for justification to include factive mental states. One motivation for epistemological disjunctivism is that it would allow for a kind of infallibilism in perception: in the good case, the basis for my perceptual belief is something that absolutely guarantees the truth of that belief (McDowell 1982, Pritchard 2012). At the same time, it does so in a way that is compatible with a (somewhat unusual) kind of access internalism (Pritchard 2012): in the good case, my experience justifies me not only in believing, say, that there’s a cat in front of me, but also in believing that I’m perceiving veridically. This allows me, at least in the good case, to know on the basis of mere reflection that I’m in a state that infallibly guarantees that there is a cat in front of me. I cannot, however, know whether or not I am in a state that guarantees that there’s a cat. Because veridical and hallucinatory experiences are indistinguishable, epistemological disjunctivism implies that even if one can know that she does have good (infallible) evidence for p in the good case, one might yet fail to know that she lacks good evidence for p in the bad case, where she would continue to think she had good evidence. This brand of access internalism is unlikely to satisfy most internalists (Smithies 2013). Other versions of epistemological disjunctivism (not all of which embrace the title) are motivated differently. Some are motivated by the idea that what justifies a perceptual belief that p is the fact that one sees that p (Millar 2011, Byrne 2016), some by the idea that all evidence consists of facts (Williamson 2000), and some by the idea that veridical involves a successful exercise of a capacity while the hallucinatory case does not (Schellenberg 2016). Coherentism and classical foundationalism attempt to satisfy the Metaevidential Principle in a way that allows these theories to (a) defend, rather than simply postulate, the epistemic legitimacy of perception, and (b) satisfy the internalist demand that the factors relevant to the justification of a belief be internal to the agent. Internalist modest foundationalism does (b) but not (a); externalist versions do (a) but not (b). (Both reject the Metaevidential Principle.) Although it is possible to defend an externalist epistemology that is otherwise structurally similar to classical foundationalism or coherentism (Goldman 1986), extant externalist theories have followed modest foundationalism in allowing beliefs about external objects and properties to be epistemologically basic. Externalist theories impose more (and also sometimes less) than the seemings internalist requirement that the agent have the relevant perceptual experience. One obvious candidate factor is reliability. Alvin Goldman (1979, 1986) argues that, so long as perception really is reliable,[6]  the agent need not have reasons for believing perception to be reliable in order to be justified in her perceptual beliefs. What makes perceptual beliefs justified, on such a view, is that they are reliably formed. The simplest reliabilist theory of perceptual belief is one that holds (SR): a belief is prima facie justified iff it is the result of a reliable cognitive process. This offers a nonevidentialist theory of perceptual justification; rather than being justified by evidential connections to experiences or other beliefs, it is the mere fact that the producing or sustaining process has a tendency to yield true beliefs that makes the perceptual belief justified. This is not to say that it precludes evidence from playing any epistemic role but only that it does not require evidence for perceptual justification; an agent can have justified perceptual beliefs without having any evidence. A second externalist approach can be offered either as an alternative or an addendum to reliabilism. It holds that what makes certain beliefs about the world justified is that they have a distinctive psychological etiology, e.g., that they are the outputs of a perceptual module (where what counts as a perceptual module is spelled out in architectural terms, rather than in terms of phenomenology or the agent’s background beliefs; Lyons 2009). Psychological etiology is not available to mere reflection, and the theory leaves open the possibility that the agent has a justified perceptual belief with the requisite perceptual etiology, without having any conscious experiences or evidence of any other kind. Obviously, the lack of an evidential requirement will be controversial, but the proponent of this view sees this as little more than the externalist had already signed on for. A third possibility is to claim that what makes perceptual beliefs justified is that they are properly formed, where the operative conception of “proper” is cashed in terms of a biological—usually evolutionary—understanding of proper function. Again, this can be offered either in conjunction with (Plantinga 1993) or in opposition to (Bergmann 2006, Graham 2012) reliabilism. Many of the objections to these views are just specific applications of objections to reliabilism, externalism, and teleological theories more generally. For instance, clairvoyance objections (BonJour 1980) aim to show that reliability is not sufficient for prima facie justification, and new evil demon arguments (Lehrer & Cohen 1983) insist that reliability is not necessary  (see the entry on reliabilist epistemology).  Teleological theories face the additional problem of the Swampman (Davidson 1987), who is a randomly occurring (therefore, lacking in any biological functions) molecular duplicate of a normal person; intuitively he seems to have justified perceptual beliefs, although this cannot be accounted for in terms of proper function. In addition to these standard worries, there is a pervasive sense among epistemologists that perceptual experiences must play some important role in the justification of perceptual belief, probably an evidential one. There are two ways to make room for experiences in an externalist epistemology. One is to add an auxiliary thesis to the effect that the requisite external property is essentially mediated in certain cases by experiences. For example, some perceptual processes might only be highly reliable when experiences are among the inputs; or they might be designed (Plantinga 1993) to take experiences as inputs. The other way is to defend a genuinely hybrid account, which posits an internalist (usually evidentialist) constraint that is not taken to reduce to the more general external criteria already in place. An example of this second approach is Alston’s (1988) internalist externalism. He requires that every justified belief have some ground, or evidence, and that this ground be accessible; that is the internalist element. He claims, however, that what makes a ground (good) evidence for some belief is that the ground reliably indicates the truth of that belief, and this fact is one that need not be accessible to the agent; this is the externalist element. Juan Comesaña (2010) endorses a similar view, though in ostensibly process reliabilist terms (the processes he has in mind, however, are very narrow, of the form “believing h on the basis of e”, which makes it more similar to an indicator reliabilism than a typical process reliabilism). Goldman (2011) wants experiential evidence to play a central role in perception, though he does not explicitly endorse an experiential/evidential requirement. He offers a two-factor reliabilist proposal for understanding evidence, which combines process and indicator reliabilism; for e to be evidence for h (i) e must be among the inputs to a reliable process that outputs h, and (ii) there must be an objective fittingness relation between e and h, that is, e must reliably indicate the truth of h. These theories understand evidential justification in terms of reliability. One could alternatively understand it in teleological terms (Plantinga 1993) and couple this with a requirement that every justified perceptual belief be based on some appropriate experiential evidence (although teleological theories tend not to take this extra step). Either way, we get a theory that solves some of the Sellarsian problems for seemings internalism. The reliability or teleology can determine which experiences serve as proper evidence for which beliefs, and it shouldn’t matter whether experiences have the right kind of content, or any content at all. The external factor thus plays roughly the same role as internalized know-how does for Markie’s view. Like Markie’s view, externalist theories of perceptual evidence violate evidence essentialism, but unlike that view, they retain the objectivity of evidence, even if the teleological views see it as species-relative. Of course, such hybrid theories will still be unsatisfying to internalists. Even if they require certain internal factors for justification, they still leave the total determinants of justification outside the agent’s ken. Some experience of mine will count as evidence for some belief of mine, but it is an utter mystery to me which belief the experience is evidence for. This will not satisfy the internalist, at least not the sort who thinks that if we are justified in believing something, then this is a fact we can ascertain on the basis of mere reflection. At the same time, nonevidentialist externalists are not likely to see what is compelling about the experiential requirement, especially if it doesn’t go far enough to appease internalist scruples anyway.