 The word “fact” is used in at least two different ways. In the locution “matters of fact”, facts are taken to be what is contingently the case, or that of which we may have empirical or a posteriori knowledge. Thus Hume famously writes at the beginning of Section IV of An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding: “All the objects of human reason or inquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, Relations of Ideas and Matters of Fact”. The word is also used in locutions such as In this second use, the functor (operator, connective) “It is a fact that” takes a sentence to make a sentence (an alternative view has it that “It is a fact” takes a nominalised sentence, a that-clause, to make a sentence), and the predicate “is a fact” is either elliptic for the functor, or takes a nominalised sentence to make a sentence. It is locutions of this second sort that philosophers have often employed in order to claim (or deny) that facts are part of the inventory of what there is, and play an important role in semantics, ontology, metaphysics, epistemology and the philosophy of mind. We may, then, distinguish between Humean facts and functorial facts. With the help of this distinction, two philosophical options can be formulated. One may think that there are facts in the functorial sense of the word which are contingent—the fact that Sam is sad—and facts in the functorial sense which are not contingent—the fact that \(2 + 2 = 4\). Or one may think that all facts in the functorial sense are contingent, are Humean matters of fact. The latter option is expounded in the influential philosophy of facts to be found in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (1921). Wittgenstein there announces that the world is the totality of facts and that every fact is contingent (Wittgenstein TLP: 1.1). The word “fact”, particularly when it is understood in the functorial sense, belongs to a family of related terms: “circumstance”, “situation (Sachlage)”, “state of affairs (Sachverhalt)”. We refer happily to the state of affairs or circumstance that Sam is sad and to the situation in which Sam is sad, although “It is a circumstance/situation that Sam is sad”, unlike “It is a fact/the case that Sam is sad”, is ill-formed. In what follows, we distinguish three types of account of what it is to be a fact in the functorial sense and consider some possible roles for facts which have been thought to yield arguments in favor of admitting facts into our inventory of what there is. Since the category of facts is a formal category, a semantic or ontological category, we then look in some detail at different formal theories of facts and their ilk. What might a fact be? Three popular views about the nature of facts can be distinguished: In order to understand these claims and the relations between them it is necessary to appeal to some accounts of truth, truth-bearers, states of affairs, obtaining, objects, properties, relations and exemplification. Propositions are a popular candidate for the role of what is true or false. One view of propositions has it that these are composed exclusively of concepts, individual concepts (for example, the concept associated with the proper name “Sam”), general concepts (the concept expressed by the predicates “is sad” and “est triste”) and formal concepts (for example, the concept expressed by “or”). Concepts so understood are things we can understand. Properties and relations, we may then say, are not concepts, for they are not the sort of thing we understand. Properties are exemplified by objects and objects fall under concepts. Similarly, objects stand in relations but fall under relational concepts. It will be convenient to understand the view that a fact is just a sui generis type of entity in which objects exemplify properties or stand in relations as relying on the way of understanding properties and relations just sketched. We shall refer to the view as the claim that facts are exemplifications. Similarly, we may understand the claim that a fact is an obtaining state of affairs to say that a state of affairs is something which contains one or more objects and at least one property or relation and that a state of affairs obtains if an object exemplifies a property or one or more objects stand in a relation. “Obtains” (German: “besteht”) belongs to the same family of predicates as “is true”. Just as it is often argued that the truth-predicate is tenseless and timeless, so it is sometimes argued or assumed that “obtains” is tenseless and timeless. A distinct question: Is “obtain” not simply a fancy way of saying “exists”? (Sundholm 1994). No, it is sometimes claimed. Obtaining is a mode of being. If a state of affairs obtains, then an obtaining state of affairs exists, a fact exists. In this respect, “obtains” resembles “endures”. Things endure. If a thing endures, then the enduring thing exists. But it should be noted that some philosophers use “proposition” or “structured proposition” (Soames 2010) to refer to what are here called “states of affairs” and that some philosophers do not distinguish between properties and concepts. Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that in ordinary English the expression “state of affairs” is not normally used to refer to something which obtains or fails to obtain. It is used to refer to what is the case. Philosophers who talk of “states of affairs” as obtaining or failing to obtain are employing the term as a technical term, often as a translation of the German word “Sachverhalt”. Finally, states of affairs, unlike facts, are commonly said to last or endure, whereas “Sachverhalte” do not last or endure. The two views of facts as exemplifications of properties and as obtaining states of affairs raise many metaphysical and ontological questions and are often appealed to in giving answers to metaphysical and ontological questions. They are also often appealed to in answers to questions about semantics and intentionality. Finally, facts are sometimes invoked in an area where semantics and ontology connect, the theory of truthmaking. Throughout the twentieth century the categories of fact and state of affairs have also been been the object of scepticism (see Betti 2015). The metaphysical and ontological questions which are raised by the two views of facts mentioned include the following: Are the properties and relations which go to make up facts abstract (repeatable) universals or bearer-specific (non-repeatable) properties and relations (tropes)? If they are abstract universals, are these such that they are always exemplified, as friends of “Aristotelian” universals claim, or not, as friends of “Platonic” universals claim? And are they qualitative only (the property of being round) or also substantial (the property of being a man)? Are there facts containing abstract objects and properties, for example the fact that 2 is a number? Is a fact which contains a concrete object, for example the fact that Sam is sad, itself concrete or abstract? Are there facts which are formally complex, for example negative or conditional facts? What is the relation between facts, on the one hand, and concrete events, processes and states, on the other hand? Do objects stand in relations because the objects and the relations they stand in are parts of facts? What are the identity conditions for facts? Are there states of affairs which do not obtain? May such states of affairs contain non-existent objects? Are states of affairs abstract entities which exist necessarily? Do facts understood as exemplifications of properties come in two kinds—the contingently existing ones and the non-contingently existing ones? (For discussions of all these questions see the entry on  states of affairs.)  If concrete events, processes and states are identical with facts or can be constructed out of facts, then it is plausible to think that causality is a relation between facts. If they are not identical with facts and cannot be constructed out of facts, then it is plausible to think that causality is a relation between events and states and that causality should not be identified with causal explanations. For discussions of the view that one or both of the relata of the causal relation are facts, see Vendler 1967a,b; Menzies 1989; Mellor 1995; Persson 1997; and also the entry on  the metaphysics of causation. The assumption that facts contain objects, properties and relations as proper parts may be criticised (Lowe 1998; Vallicella 2000; Künne 2003). One natural mereological principle is that the proper parts of the most basic kinds of whole belong to the same general ontological category to which their wholes belong. Thus parts of things or substances are things or substances and parts of processes are processes. The view that the fact that Sam is sad contains a substance and a property offends against this principle: substances and properties belong to different kinds and neither substances nor properties, it seems, are facts. Perhaps the natural mereological principle should be rejected in favor of the view that entities of any kind may come together to form a whole. But friends of facts tend to think of facts as forming a very natural kind of whole. Another possible view is that Sam is a fact rather than part of a fact (Armstrong 1997; Johansson 2004: 34; Récanati 2000; Bergmann 1967). Even if facts or states of affairs do not contain objects such as substances or events, some may still be about, or concern, such objects. This notion of aboutness has recently been assigned heavy metaphysical duties. Thus, Shamik Dasgupta (2014, 2017) defines qualitative facts as facts which are not about any particular individuals, and argues that all the basic facts that constitute the universe are qualitative, the individualistic (i.e., non-qualitative) facts being grounded in that qualitative basis (see below on grounding as a relation between facts). And Dan Marshall exploits the notion of factual aboutness for the purpose of theorizing about intrinsicality. In his 2016a, he argues that a number of different notions of intrinsicality can be analysed in terms of the notion of a state of affairs being intrinsically about something, and in his 2016b he defends a particular account of that sort. One ontological role for states of affairs and facts is to be the primary bearers of modality. Suppose that facts are obtaining states of affairs. Then we may distinguish the obtaining state of affairs that Sam is sad from the obtaining states of affairs that Sam is possibly sad, that Sam is probably sad, and that Sam ought to be sad. Here the modal properties qualify the property of being sad and so qualify Sam. They are de re modalities. And, so the view goes, the place of such modal properties is in states of affairs. (A state of affairs is, as the German terms “Sachverhalt”, “Sachverhältnis” suggest, a relation between things, the way things stand with respect to one another, “wie die Sachen sich zueinander verhalten”.) A further claim is that some de dicto modalities properly qualify states of affairs: the state of affairs that Sam is sad probably obtains/possibly obtains/ought to obtain. Suppose that a fact is just the exemplification of properties. Then we may distinguish the fact that Sam is a man and the fact that Sam is necessarily a man. But a friend of facts like the last one then has to accept that not all facts are formally simple. Another possible ontological role for states of affairs and facts is to provide the terms for the tie of grounding or explanation. The fact that there is an explosion explains the fact that Sam’s head turns (causal explanation). The fact that Mary slapped Sam is explained by the fact that Sam is a sexist (explanation of action by reference to an “objective” reason; Dancy 2000). The fact that Sam admires Mary is explained by the fact that she is charming (explanation of feeling by reference to an “objective” reason). The fact that there is a one-one correlation between the \(F\)s and the \(G\)s is explained by the fact that the number of \(F\)s = the number of \(G\)s (non-causal, conceptual or essential explanation). Sceptics about such claims ask what “the fact that \(p\) explains the fact that \(q\)” adds to “\(q\) because \(p\)”. (See Correia & Schnieder 2012, Mulligan 2007, Trogdon 2013, and the entry on  metaphysical grounding.) Appeal to facts has also been made in order to give a semantics for counterfactuals (Kratzer 2002). A premise semantics for counterfactual, Kratzer argues, relies on facts: in a premise semantics, a “would”-counterfactual is true in a world \(w\) iff every way of adding as many facts of \(w\) to the antecedent as consistency allows reaches a point where the resulting set logically implies the consequent. On the other hand, a “might”-counterfactual is true in a world \(w\) iff not every way of adding as many facts of \(w\) to the antecedent as consistency allows reaches a point where adding the consequent would result in an inconsistent set. Those facts, she argues, have to be propositions, but they must be highly specific, almost as specific as facts conceived of as particulars (see  section 1.3  below). Finally, certain metaphysical disputes of the realism/anti-realism type are sometimes characterized in terms of facts: in such a dispute, the realist is said to countenance facts of a certain kind, whereas the anti-realist is said to reject facts of that kind. The disagreement between realists about tense (or A-theorists) and anti-realists about tense (or B-theorists), for instance, is sometimes taken to boil down to a disagreement about the question whether there are tensed facts: the former answer ‘Yes’ while the latter say ‘No’. (See, e.g., Mellor 1998, Fine 2005 and Correia & Rosenkranz 2011.) One difficulty faced by such characterizations is that of making clear what the relevant facts are supposed to be. The difficulty is particularly acute in certain debates, for instance in the debate over tense realism. For what is it for a fact to be tensed? It cannot simply be said that a tensed fact is a fact that can be referred to by means of a tensed description of type “the fact that \(p\)”, where “\(p\)” is a tensed sentence. For it is open to a B-theorist to hold that such expressions do refer to (tenseless) facts—e.g., that “the fact that Sam is lying” refers, at any time \(t\), to a fact which can also be referred to (at any time) using the description “the fact that Sam is lying at \(t\)”. Another suggestion is that a fact is tensed if and only if it is transient, i.e., sometimes obtains and sometimes fails to obtain. Yet, it may be replied, even if the proposed characterization does capture some tensed facts, it leaves aside a number of other such facts, e.g., those which can be referred to by “the fact that Sam is currently sitting or not currently sitting” and (barring certain forms of indeterminism) “the fact that if Sam is currently sitting, then it was the case yesterday that Sam would be sitting one day hence”, respectively. “Know” in instances of the locution “\(x\) knows that \(p\)” is factive: if \(x\) knows that \(p\), then \(p\). Similarly, “know” in instances of the locution “\(x\) knows \(y\)” is veridical: if \(x\) knows \(y\), is acquainted with \(y\), then there is a \(y\) and \(x\) knows \(y\). Is knowledge that \(p\) knowledge of facts? Is coming to know (cf. “Erkennen”) that \(p\) a form of contact with facts, where facts are understood as something other than true truth-bearers? Husserl, Russell, Vendler and Hossack (Husserl 1900–1901; Russell 1906–1907; Vendler 1967a, 1972; Hossack 2007) reply affirmatively to one of these questions; thus Russell at one point argues that a perception has a single object, such as “knife-to-left-of-book”, an entity he first called a “complex” and then “a fact” (Russell ONTF). From Ramsey to Williamson (Ramsey 1927 [1931]; Vickers 2004; Williamson 2000) many philosophers have replied negatively. What may be said in favor of the view? Consider the atomic predication Fa, where this is a formula that a logician would use to represent the claim that object a has property F. Coming to know that Fa, in the simplest cases, involves acquaintance with objects and properties. Coming to know that the wall is red by seeing that it is red often involves seeing the wall. The wall is not any sort of concept. According to a popular theory in perceptual psychology, seeing that the wall is red or straight typically involves perception of a constant property, the redness or straightness of the wall, and perception of it as constant (“property constancy”, “color constancy”, “shape constancy”). These properties are not concepts. There is thus some reason for thinking that perceptually coming to know that \(p\), in the simplest cases, involves epistemic contact with objects and with properties. If that is right, then two components of the view that to come to know that \(p\) in such cases is to come to have knowledge of facts are plausible. But even if perceptual knowledge of facts is allowed, it is not clear why one should think that instances of “knowledge that \(p\)” or of “coming to know that \(p\)” in which the substitutions for “\(p\)” are logically complex, constitute knowledge of robust facts. Similarly, if we consider the many and various types of coming to know that \(p\) in which the source of knowledge is not sensory perception but, for example, testimony or inference, we may think that in such cases there is no reason to think that what we come to know are facts. Kratzer’s (2002) account of knowledge of facts is applied to Gettier problems (Gettier 1963, see the entry on  the analysis of knowledge).  She puts forward a view according to which facts are particulars which exemplify propositions (cf. Baylis 1948)—just as other particulars such as tables and persons exemplify properties. (She models these facts and propositions within Situation Semantics, as situations of a certain sort and sets of situations, respectively, but we need not go into the details here. Note that, as we saw in  section 1.2  above, she also countenances facts which are propositions.) She then proposes the following analysis of knowledge: \(S\) knows \(p\) if and only if It is condition (ii), Kratzer argues, which deals with Gettier cases. Take the second type of case discussed by Gettier. Smith is justified in believing the false proposition that Jones owns a Ford. Therefore he is justified in believing the proposition that Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona. Now Brown happens to be in Barcelona, but Smith has no idea about where Brown is—in particular, he is not justified in believing that Brown is in Barcelona. Intuitively, Smith does not know the disjunctive proposition he is justified in believing. But that proposition is true, and so the standard analysis of knowledge fails. The analysis in terms of beliefs de re of facts fares better, Kratzer argues. For, she claims, the fact exemplified by the disjunctive proposition is the fact that Brown is in Barcelona, and Smith’s belief is not a de re belief about that fact. We have mentioned the view that facts may explain actions and mental states and the view that facts are what we know. Facts are also invoked in the philosophy of mind by philosophers who claim that judgments or beliefs enjoy the property of intentionality, of being “directed towards” something, because they represent states of affairs or are psychological relations to states of affairs and that judgments and beliefs are correct or satisfied only if states of affairs obtain, that is, if facts exist. Versions of these claims are given by many philosophers from Meinong, the early Husserl and Russell to Searle (Searle 1983). Analogous claims in semantics are sometimes made about propositions or other truth-bearers: the proposition that Sam is sad represents the state of affairs that Sam is sad and is true only if this state of affairs obtains. Versions of this view are given by Husserl, Wittgenstein and Carnap. See the  supplementary document on the History of Philosophies of Facts. One objection to the view that the judgment that Sam is sad represents a state of affairs is that although the judger arguably thinks of Sam and of his sadness, he may not possess any concept of a state of affairs. (Consider the analogous claim that one may judge that \(p\) without employing the concept of truth). Perhaps then a judgment represents a state of affairs but does not represent it as a state of affairs. One objection to this claim is that it commits one to the ontological view that there are states of affairs which do not obtain, the states of affairs represented by false judgments or beliefs. If we reject the view that judgments and beliefs represent states of affairs, it is still possible to claim that judgments and beliefs have correctness conditions which mention states of affairs: if \(x\) judges correctly that \(p\), then the state of affairs that \(p\) obtains. And if this is plausible, so too is the further claim that if \(x\) judges correctly that \(p\), then \(x\) judges correctly that \(p\) because the state of affairs that \(p\) obtains. Facts make judgments correct. Does the proposition that Sam is sad represent the state of affairs that Sam is sad? It may be objected that the proposition does not refer to anything as a state of affairs. And once again the friend of states of affairs may retreat to the safer claims that the proposition that Sam is sad is true only if the state of affairs that Sam is sad obtains and that if the proposition that Sam is sad is true, it is true because the state of affairs obtains. Facts make propositions true. Facts, then, are perhaps qualified to play the role of what makes judgments correct and propositions true. But the theory of correctness and of truth does not require us to accept that there are facts. Indeed it may be thought that the requirements of such a theory are satisfied by the observations that a judgment that \(p\) is correct only if \(p\), and that the proposition that \(p\) is true only if \(p\). If arguments in metaphysics or epistemology persuade us that there are facts, then we may perhaps appeal to facts in giving accounts of correctness and of truth. In the case of the theory of correctness conditions for judgment and belief the argument that knowledge is of facts together with the view that, contrary to a long and influential tradition, the theory of belief and of judgment presupposes a theory of knowledge (Williamson 2000) may persuade us that facts make judgments and beliefs correct. The view that facts make propositions or other truth-bearers true is one theory among many of truthmaking. The theory of truthmaking deals with questions at the intersection between ontology, metaphysics and semantics. The view that facts are what make truth-bearers true is the oldest theory of truthmaking. One central choice within truthmaker theory is between acceptance and rejection of truthmaker maximalism. Truthmaker maximalism is the view that every truth has a truthmaker. (It is an analogue of claims about modalities other than the modality of truth such as that every necessity is made necessary, that every probability has a probabiliser, that if something has a value there is something which makes it valuable, a “valifier” etc.) Factualist truthmaker maximalism says that every truth is made true by a fact. Factualist truthmaker maximalism comes in many shapes and sizes. It is sometimes combined with the view that propositions represent states of affairs. It is sometimes defended by friends of the view that facts are obtaining states of affairs (Pfänder 1921), sometimes by friends of the view that facts are neither true propositions nor obtaining states of affairs but exemplifications of properties (Armstrong 2004). By far the most popular objection to factualist truthmaker maximalism, an objection made by both friends and enemies of facts, is that it is ontologically baroque, that is to say, incredible. The idea that there are negative or conditional facts, the objection goes, is incompatible with the demands of metaphysical economy or with the requirements of naturalism. By far the most popular factualist alternative to factualist truthmaker maximalism is the view that all logically atomic truths have truthmakers and that these are formally simple or atomic facts or the view that the only truthmakers which are facts are formally simple. Versions of these views are defended by the logical atomists (see the entry on the  correspondence theory of truth  and  section 2.4.2  below). Appeals to facts as truthmakers presuppose that there are different facts. But it has been argued that if there are any facts, there is only one Great Fact. See the  supplementary document on the Slingshot Argument. If this argument is sound, then theories of facts as truthmakers and as what correspond to truths as well as many other theories which rely on facts, are trivialised. In the debate between friends and enemies of factualist truthmaker maximalism it is often assumed that truthmakers must be ontologically or metaphysically fundamental. Indeed it is sometimes argued that the theory of truthmaking is a guide to what there is and it is assumed that what there is is just what is ontologically fundamental. The assumption may be rejected (see the entry on  truthmakers).  Perhaps there are facts but facts are not ontologically fundamental. (Compare the claim that there are social entities but that these are not ontologically fundamental.) Then even atomic facts would not be ontologically fundamental. Perhaps Sam and his concrete state of sadness are ontologically fundamental and the fact that Sam is sad is not ontologically fundamental. What might it mean to say that there are facts but they are not ontologically fundamental? Perhaps that facts or the unity of facts are determined by non-facts (Vallicella 2000, Mulligan 2006b). Possible candidates for this role are truth-bearers, for example propositions, together with what is ontologically fundamental. If facts are not ontologically fundamental, then one objection to factualist truthmaker maximalism misses its mark. According to yet another view, facts are complexes made up of objects and properties and those complexes which are facts are less basic than their parts (Fine 1982). Any philosophy of facts owes us an account of the form of such expressions as “the fact that Sam is sad” (Lowe 1998) and “the state of affairs that Sam is sad”. (Analogous questions arise concerning the form of “the proposition that Sam is sad”, “the property of sadness”, “the concept of sadness” etc.) Friends of facts who have written at great length about facts and given the distinct impression that they are referring to facts and predicating properties of facts have nevertheless claimed that facts or situations cannot be named (Russell, Wittgenstein; cf. Clarke 1975) or that they have no properties (Ingarden 1965). The expression “the fact that Sam is sad” looks like a definite description. What is the form of such a description? One possibility (Künne 2003: 10) is that it should be read as: the unique \(x\) such that \(x\) is a fact and \(x =\) that Sam is sad. One objection to this suggestion is that clauses such as “that Sam is sad” cannot flank the identity sign. The following identity sentence, on the other hand, is perfectly well-formed and, many friends of facts claim, false: The fact that Sam is sad = the proposition that Sam is sad This suggests that clauses such as “that Sam is sad” can only flank the identity sign if they are governed by expressions such as “the fact”, “the proposition”, “the belief”. The suggested analysis of our definite descriptions may be motivated by the assumption that “the fact that Sam is sad” is derived by nominalising “It is a fact that Sam is sad” and the assumption that in the latter sentence “It is a fact” takes “that Sam is sad” to make a sentence. Another account of expressions such as “the fact that Fa” builds on suggestions made by Russell in 1913 (Hochberg 2001). Let ‘\(\mathbf{T}\)’, ‘\(\mathbf{A}\)’ and ‘\(\mathbf{IN}\)’ express the relations ‘is a term in’, ‘is an attribute in’ and ‘informs’, respectively. These relations are the formal ontological relations between atomic facts, on the one hand, and their terms (objects), attributes (properties) and forms, on the other hand. Then the structure of “the fact that Fa exists” is: That is, the fact that contains \(a\) as a term and \(F\) as an attribute and that is of the form \(\phi x\) exists. It has also been argued that what underlies talk about an object exemplifying a property is just the relations of being a term in a fact and being an attribute in a fact (Sprigge 1970). How do expressions such as “the state of affairs that Sam is sad” relate to their referents? One view is that they are rigid designators. (For discussion of this question in connection with related cases such as instances of “the property of being \(F\)” and “the proposition that \(p\)”, see Schnieder 2005, Yagiwasa 1997, Tye 1981). According to a common definition, a brute fact is a fact that is unexplained, i.e. a fact of which there is no explanation. (On the question of how to characterise brute facts and a number of other issues discussed below, see Vintiadis and Mekios 2018, a volume dedicated to the topic of brute facts.) “Explain”, like many other verbs of interest to philosophers (“mean”, “refer” “name”) can be used personally and impersonally (typically a three-place vs a binary relation). The contrast is for instance between and Personal explanations are not truth-bearers but are correct or incorrect and successful or unsuccessful. Impersonal explanations are true or false but not correct or incorrect, successful or unsuccessful. What is the relation between personal and impersonal explanations? Plausibly, one connection between the two is this: if a personal explanation is successful, then the person on the receiving end of the explanation must grasp some true impersonal explanation thanks to the explanation. Personal explanation is arguably irrelevant to the notion of bruteness, and accordingly from now on we will focus on impersonal explanation. It is common to distinguish between epistemic and metaphysical (or ontic, or ontological) explanations (see e.g. Barnes 1984 and Salmon 1984). The distinction can be precisely formulated in many different ways, but the contrast can be illustrated in a simple way by means of an example taken from Bolzano 1837 (§162). The following two statements are (let us suppose) true: Whereas the first one gives a metaphysical (in this case, a causal) explanation of a fact, the second one gives an epistemic explanation (in this case, a reason to believe that a state of affairs obtains). (We find it very plausible to think that every epistemic explanation is a personal explanation, but since this seems to be far from being a majority view, we will not assume it to be correct.) Given that there is this distinction between explanations, one can correspondingly distinguish between two types of brute facts, the epistemically brute facts and the metaphysically brute facts. Since epistemic explanations and metaphysical explanations themselves come in various types, one can actually make more fine-grained distinctions. Thus, for instance, if deductive-nomological explanations count as epistemic explanations, one can introduce the notion of a “deductive-nomologically brute fact”, i.e. of a fact that has no deductive-nomological explanation. And given that grounding explanations (explanations given by pointing to a ground) count as metaphysical explanations, one can introduce the notion of a “ground-theoretically brute fact”, i.e. of a fact that has no grounding explanation. A further distinction adds to the multiplicity of notions of bruteness. This is the distinction between explanations and relations that “back” explanations. The relation of causation, it is often claimed, backs causal explanation: what makes it true that a given fact causally explains another fact is that the former causes the latter or that some event causes another event. Likewise, some philosophers distinguish between the relation of grounding and grounding explanations (see §4 of the entry on  metaphysical grounding).  Corresponding to these various relations are various notions of being brute, which must be distinguished from the notions introduced above: being brute qua uncaused, being brute qua ungrounded, etc. These notions deserve to be put under the label “metaphysical bruteness”, just like the notions defined in terms of explanation that we did put under this label above. Thus, there are very many notions of bruteness one may want to distinguish. In what follows we will largely (but not completely) ignore this variety, and we will focus mainly on metaphysical bruteness. The fact that there is a world and the fact that throughout its history the universe will have contained exactly N electrons are perhaps good examples of facts that are metaphysically brute, in several senses of “metaphysically brute”. The same is perhaps true of basic laws of physics (understood as facts). In reply to van Inwagen’s (1990) Special Composition Question, Markosian (1998) defends the “brutality of compositional facts”, the view that whenever there is an object composed of some given objects, then it is an ungrounded fact that there is an object composed of these objects. Dasgupta (2016) holds that essentialist facts, such as the fact that Socrates is essentially human, are “not apt for being grounded”, and hence are brute in the sense of ungrounded. Glazier (2017) argues against Dasgupta’s view, but holds that essentialist facts are brute in another sense. He advocates the view that metaphysical explanations of a certain kind, essentialist explanations of the type “p because it is essential to x that p”, are true when the explanans is true. On his view, essentialist facts cannot themselves receive such essentialist explanations, and hence are metaphysically brute in this specific sense. “Emergent” facts (see the entry on emergent properties) provide a further interesting illustration. On some views, they are brute in the sense of ungrounded, but they are nevertheless nomologically necessitated by what they emerge from, and hence have an explanation (see Baysan 2019). Are modal facts brute? This question has been at the centre of metaphysical inquiry for a large part of the 20th century and is still widely debated. Which notion of bruteness is at stake in the debate is however (very) often unclear. The key question here is whether modal facts have their “source” in other kinds of facts.  This can be understood in various ways, some metaphysical, some not. Thus, friends of the view that necessity has its source in essence may be understood as endorsing any of the following claims: On each view, the fact that a given proposition is necessary is never brute. While on the first view, it may be epistemic bruteness that is involved, on the other view it is metaphysical bruteness, in two different forms. The concept of a brute fact is closely related to the Principle of Sufficient Reason (see the entry on the  principle of sufficient reason).  The PSR comes in various versions. For each sense of “brute”, the claim that there are no brute facts is (logically equivalent to) a version of the PSR. Thus if we appeal to the distinction between epistemically brute and metaphysically brute facts, then some of these versions are epistemic (e.g. “Every fact has a deductive-nomological explanation”) and others metaphysical (e.g. “Every fact is grounded”). Van Inwagen (1983) and Bennett (1984) once put forward a famous argument to the effect that the PSR entails that every truth is necessary. Since some truths are contingent, the argument is in effect an objection against the PSR, and hence potentially in favour of brute facts. The force of the argument strongly depends on which version of the PSR is taken to be involved. The argument, in one version or another, has stimulated much philosophical reflection since then (see e.g. Hudson 1997 and the reply in Feit 1998, Dasgupta 2016, and McDaniel 2019 and the reply in Werner 2020). Following current discussions on grounding, let us define metaphysical foundationalism as the view according to which every fact is either ungrounded or grounded in ungrounded facts (see Dixon 2016 and Rabin & Rabern 2016 for discussions on the view and its relations to other views in the vicinity). Metaphysical foundationalism entails that there are ungrounded facts. The converse entailment, of course, fails. Let us say, following common usage, that a fact partially grounds another fact if the former fully grounds, or only helps to ground, the latter. Granted that partial grounding is a strict partial order (i.e. a transitive and irreflexive relation), the negation of metaphysical foundationalism entails the existence of infinitely descending chains of partial grounds (a series \(F_1\), \(F_2\), \(F_3\), … where \(F_1\) is partially grounded in \(F_2\), \(F_2\) in \(F_3\), …). The converse entailment, of course, also fails: foundationalism is compatible with the existence of such chains. Swapping grounding for other explanation-backing relations, or for relations of explaining, yields other forms of foundationalism, and the previous considerations apply mutatis mutandis to these views. “Brute” is often taken to be interchangeable with “fundamental” (see McKenzie 2017 for a representative list of references). Is this objectionable? Just like “brute”, “fundamental” can be understood in many ways (see the entry on  fundamentality  for the various notions currently discussed in metaphysics), and whether “brute” and “fundamental” mean the same or otherwise have the same extension depends, trivially, on how these terms are understood. As we saw, “brute” can be understood as meaning the same as “ungrounded”. In some contexts, many philosophers use “fundamental” as synonymous with “ungrounded” in a way that is not at all objectionable (see e.g. Bennett 2011, Rosen 2010 and Schaffer 2009). Using “brute” and “fundamental” as interchangeable can thus be perfectly legitimate, albeit in uninteresting ways. The question of interchangeability becomes interesting when “brute” and “fundamental” are used with different meanings. Thus, for instance, the question of whether a fundamental qua ungrounded fact can fail to be brute qua lacking a metaphysical explanation is interesting (McKenzie’s (2017) aim is to argue for a positive answer to this question). However, in this case, as presumably in all the other possible cases of interest, the use of the labels “brute” and “fundamental” is immaterial because the question can be rephrased using only their respective definientia (the previous question, for instance, can be rephrased as the question whether an ungrounded fact can be metaphysically explained).