 Brouwer build his Intuitionism from the ground up and did not comment much on the relation between Intuitionism and other existing philosophies, but others after him did. Some of these connections are discussed in this section, in particular the way in which intuitionistic principles can be justified in terms of other philosophies. The connection between Intuitionism and Phenomenology, the philosophy developed by Edmund Husserl, has been investigated by several authors, during Brouwer’s lifetime as well as decades later. Hermann Weyl was among the first to discuss the relation between Brouwer’s ideas and the phenomenological view on mathematics. Like Brouwer, Weyl speaks in his book Das Kontinuum (Chapter 2) about the intuitive continuum, but Weyl’s notion is based on the phenomenology of (the consciousness of) time. Weyl later feels that Brouwer’s development of real analysis is more faithful to the idea of the intuitive continuum than his own (Weyl 1921) and therefore places himself at Brouwer’s side, at least regarding this aspect (van Atten 2002). Van Atten (2003 en 2007) uses phenomenology to justify choice sequences as mathematical objects. The author (2002) is critical about Brouwer’s justification of choice sequences, which is the motive to look for a philosophical justification elsewhere. Choice sequences occur in the work of Becker (1927) and Weyl, but they differ from Brouwer’s notion, and Husserl never discussed choice sequences publicly. Van Atten explains how the homogeneity of the continuum accounts for its inexhaustibility and nonatomicity, two key properties of the intuitive continuum according to Brouwer. Using the fact that these two essential properties are present in the definition of choice sequences, one arrives at a phenomenological justification of them. On March 10, 1928, Brouwer lectured in Vienna on his intuitionistic foundations of mathematics. Ludwig Wittgenstein attended that lecture, persuaded by Herbert Feigl, who afterwards wrote about the hours he spent with Wittgenstein and others after the lecture: a great event took place. Suddenly and very volubly Wittgenstein began talking philosophy – at great length. Perhaps this was the turning point, for ever since that time, 1929, when he moved to Cambridge University, Wittgenstein was a philosopher again, and began to exert a tremendous influence. Others dispute that Brouwer’s lecture influenced Wittgenstein’s thinking (Hacker 1986, Hintikka 1992, Marion 2003). In how far, if at all, Wittgenstein was influenced by Brouwer’s ideas is not entirely clear, but there certainly are interesting agreements and disagreements between their views. Marion (2003) argues that Wittgenstein’s conception of mathematics as described in the Tractatus is very close to that of Brouwer, and that Wittgenstein agrees with the rejection of the Law of Excluded Middle (1929 manuscript, pp 155–156 in Wittgenstein 1994) but disagrees with Brouwer’s arguments against it. Marion (2003) claims that Wittgenstein’s stance is more radical than Brouwer’s in that in the former’s view the lack of validity of the Law of Excluded Middle in mathematics is a distinguishing feature of all mathematical propositions (as opposed to empirical propositions) and not only a particularity of the mathematics of the infinite, as it is for Brouwer. Veldman (forthcoming) discusses several points of (dis)agreement between Brouwer and Wittgenstein, such as the danger of logic, which, according to both, may lead to constructions without mathematical content. One of the disagreements raised in the paper concerns Wittgenstein’s view that mathematics is a common undertaking, which is in stark contrast to Brouwer’s Creating Subject and his view that mathematics is a languageless activity. The British philosopher Michael Dummett (1975) developed a philosophical basis for Intuitionism, in particular for intuitionistic logic. Dummett explicitly states that his theory is not an exegesis of Brouwer’s work, but a possible philosophical theory for (in his words) repudiating classical reasoning in mathematics in favor of intuitionistic reasoning. Dummett’s approach starts with the idea that the choice for one logic over another must necessarily lie in the meaning one attaches to logical statements. In the theory of meaning that Dummett uses, which is based on Wittgenstein’s ideas about language and in particular on his idea that meaning is use, the meaning of a sentence is determined by the way in which the sentence is used. The meaning of a mathematical statement manifests itself in the use made of it, and the understanding of it is the knowledge of the capacity to use the statement. This view is supported by the way in which we acquire mathematical knowledge. When we learn a mathematical notion we learn how to use it: how to compute it, prove it or infer from it. And the only way to establish that we have grasped the meaning of a mathematical statement lies in our proficiency in making correct use of the statement. Given this view on meaning, the central notion in the theory of meaning for mathematics is not, as in Platonism, truth, but proof; the understanding of a mathematical statement consists in the ability to recognize a proof of it when one is presented with one. This then, as Dummett argues, leads to the adoption of intuitionistic logic as the logic of mathematical reasoning. Interestingly, as Dummett (1975) remarks himself, his theory of meaning is far apart from Brouwer’s ideas on mathematics as an essentially languageless activity. So that there are at least two quite different lines of thought that lead to the adoption of intuitionistic logic over classical logic, the one developed by Brouwer and the one argued for by Dummett. Dummett’s work on Intuitionism has been commented on by various philosophers such as Dag Prawitz (1977), Parsons (1986) and Richard Tieszen (1994 en 2000). Various forms of Finitism are based on a similar view as the one expressed by Dummett, but in which the constructions that are allowed to prove mathematical statements are required to exist not only in principle, but also in practice. Depending on the the precise implementation of the latter notion one arrives at different forms of Finitism, such as the Ultra-Intuitionism developed by Alexander Yessenin-Volpin (1970) and the Strict Finitism developed by Crispin Wright (1982).