 Frege showed how to resolve these difficulties for classical logic in one fell swoop. His system of logic, published in 1879 and still in use (with notational modifications), was arguably the single greatest contribution to the subject. So it is significant that on Frege's view, propositions do not have subject-predicate form. His account required a substantial distinction between logical form and grammatical form as traditionally conceived. It is hard to overemphasize the impact of this point on subsequent discussions of thought and its relation to language. Frege's leading idea was that propositions have “function-argument” structure. Though for Frege, functions are not abstract objects. In particular, while a function maps each entity in some domain onto exactly one entity in some range, Frege (1891) does not identify functions with sets of ordered pairs. On the contrary, he says that a function “by itself must be called incomplete, in need of supplementation, or unsaturated. And in this respect functions differ fundamentally from numbers (p. 133).” For example, we can represent the successor function as follows, with the integers as the relevant domain for the variable ‘x’: S(x) = x + 1. This function maps zero onto one, one onto two, and so on. We can specify a corresponding object—e.g., the set {〈x, y〉: y = x + 1}—as the “value-range” of the successor function. But according to Frege, any particular argument (e.g., the number one) “goes together with the function to make up a complete whole” (e.g., the number two); and a number does not go together with a set in this fashion. Put another way, while each number is an object, a mapping from numbers to numbers is not an additional object in Frege’s sense. As Frege noted, the word ‘function’ is often used to talk about what he would call the value-range of a function. But he maintained that the notion of an unsaturated function, which may be applied to endlessly many arguments, is “logically prior” to any notion of a set with endlessly many arguments that are specified functionally as in {〈x, y〉: y = x + 1}; see p.135, note E. Functions need not be unary. For example, arithmetic division can be represented as a function from ordered pairs of numbers onto quotients: Q(x, y) = x/y. Mappings can also be conditional. Consider the function that maps every even integer onto itself, and every odd integer onto its successor: C(x) = x if x is even, and x + 1 otherwise; C(1) = 2, C(2) = 2, C(3) = 4, etc. Frege held that propositions have parts that indicate functions, and in particular, conditional functions that map arguments onto special values that reflect the truth or falsity of propositions/sentences. (As discussed below, Frege [1892] also distinguished these “truth values” from what he called Thoughts [Gedanken] or the “senses” [Sinnen] of propositions; where each of these sentential senses “presents” a truth value in certain way—i.e., as the value of a certain indicated function given a certain indicated argument.). Variable letters, such as ‘x’ and ‘y’ in ‘Q(x, y) = x/y’, are typographically convenient for representing functions that take more than one argument. But we could also index argument places, as shown below. Or we could replace the subscripts above with lines that connect each pair of round brackets on the left of ‘=’ to a corresponding pair of brackets on the right. But the idea, however we encode it, is that a proposition has at least one constituent that is saturated by the requisite number of arguments. (If it helps, think of an unsaturated proposition-part as the result of abstracting away from one or more arguments in a complete proposition.) Frege was here influenced by Kant's discussion of judgment, and the ancient observation that merely combining two things does not make the combination truth-evaluable. So in saying that propositions have “function-argument” structure, Frege was not only rejecting the traditional idea that logical from reflects the “subject-predicate” structure of ordinary sentences, he was suggesting that propositions exhibit a special kind of unity: unlike a mere concatenation of objects, a potential premise/conclusion is formed by saturating an unsaturated mapping with a suitable argument. On Frege's view, the proposition that Mary sang has a functional component indicated by ‘sang’ and an argument indicated by ‘Mary’, even if the English sentence ‘Mary sang’ has ‘Mary’ as its subject and ‘sang’ as its predicate. The proposition can be represented as follows: Sang(Mary). Frege thought of the relevant function as a conditional mapping from individuals to truth values: Sang(x) = T if x sang, and F otherwise; where ‘T’ and ‘F’ stand for special entities such that for each individual x, Sang(x) = T if and only if x sang, and Sang(x) = F if and only if x did not sing. According to Frege, the proposition that John admires Mary combines an ordered pair of arguments with a functional component indicated by the transitive verb: Admires(John, Mary); where for any individual x, and any individual y, Admires(x, y) = T if x admires y, and F otherwise.  From this perspective, the structure and constituents are the same in the proposition that Mary is admired by John, even though ‘Mary’ is the grammatical subject of the passive sentence. Likewise, Frege did not distinguish the proposition that three precedes four from the proposition that four is preceded by three. More importantly, Frege's treatment of quantified propositions departs radically from the traditional idea that the grammatical structure of sentence reflects the logical structure of the indicated proposition. If S is the function indicated by ‘sang’, then Mary sang iff—i.e., if and only if—S(Mary) = T.  Likewise, someone sang iff: S maps some individual onto T; that is, for some individual x, S(x) = T. Or using a modern variant of Frege's original notation, someone sang iff ∃x[S(x)]. The quantifier ‘∃x’ is said to bind the variable ‘x’, which ranges over individual things in a domain of discourse. (For now, assume that the domain contains only people.) If every individual in the domain sang, then S maps every individual onto the truth value T; or using formal notation, ∀x[S(x)]. A quantifier binds each occurrence of its variable, as in ‘∃x[P(x) & D(x)]’, which reflects the logical form of ‘Someone is both a politician and deceitful’. In this last example, the quantifier combines with a complex predicate that formed by conjoining two simpler predicates. With regard to the proposition that some politician is deceitful, traditional grammar suggests the division ‘Some politician / is deceitful’, with the noun ‘politician’ forming a constituent with the quantificational word. But on a Fregean view, grammar masks the logical division between the existential quantifier and the rest: ∃x[P(x) & D(x)]. With regard to the proposition that every politician is deceitful, Frege also stresses the logical division between the quantifier and its scope: ∀x[P(x) → D(x)]; every individual is deceitful if a politician. Here too, the quantifier combines with a complex predicate, albeit a conditional rather than conjunctive predicate. (The formal sentence ‘∀x[P(x) & D(x)]’ implies, unconditionally, that every individual is a politician.) As Frege (1879) defined his analogs of the relevant modern symbols used here, ‘P(x) → D(x)’ is equivalent to ‘¬P(x) ∨ D(x)’, and ‘∀x’ is equivalent to ‘¬∃x¬’. So ‘∀x[P(x) → D(x)]’ is equivalent to ‘¬∃x¬[¬P(x) ∨ D(x)]’; and given de Morgan's Laws (concerning the relations between negation, disjunction, and conjunction), ¬∃x¬[¬P(x) ∨ D(x)] iff ¬∃x[P(x) & ¬D(x)]. Hence, ∀x[P(x) → D(x)] iff ¬∃x[P(x) & ¬D(x)]. This captures the idea that every politician is deceitful iff no individual is both a politician and not deceitful. If this conception of logical form is correct, then grammar is misleading in several respects.  First, grammar leads us to think that ‘some politician’ indicates a constituent of the proposition that some politician is deceitful. Second, grammar masks a difference between existential and universally quantified propositions; predicates are related conjunctively in the former, and conditionally in the latter. (Though as discussed in section seven, one can—and Frege [1884] did—adopt a different view that allows for relational/restricted quantifiers as in ‘∀x:P(x)[D(x)]’.) More importantly, Frege's account was designed to apply equally well to propositions involving relations and multiple quantifiers. And with regard to these propositions, there seems to be a big difference between logical structure and grammatical structure. On Frege's view, a single quantifier can bind an unsaturated position that is associated with a function that takes a single argument. But it is equally true that two quantifiers can bind two unsaturated positions associated with a function that takes a pair of arguments. For example, the proposition that everyone likes everyone can be represented with the formal sentence ‘∀x∀y[L(x, y)]’. Assuming that ‘Romeo’ and ‘Juliet’ indicate arguments, it follows that Romeo likes everyone, and that everyone likes Juliet—∀y[L(r, y)] and ∀x[L(x, j)]. And it follows from all three propositions that Romeo likes Juliet: L(r, j). The rules of inference for Frege's logic capture this general feature of the universal quantifier. A variable bound by a universal quantifier can be replaced with a name for some individual in the domain. Correlatively, a name can be replaced with a variable bound by an existential quantifier.  Given that Romeo likes Juliet, it follows that someone likes Juliet, and Romeo likes someone. Frege's formalism can capture this as well: L(r, j); so ∃x[L(x, j)] & ∃x[L(r, x)]. And given either conjunct in the conclusion, it follows that someone likes someone: ∃x∃y[L(x, y)]. A single quantifier can also bind multiple argument positions, as in ‘∃x[L(x, x)]’, which is true iff someone likes herself. Putting these points schematically: ∀x(…x…), so …n…; and …n…, so ∃x(…x…). Mixed quantification introduces an interesting wrinkle. The propositions expressed with ‘∃x∀y[L(x,y)]’ and ‘∀y∃x[L(x,y)]’ differ. We can paraphrase the first as ‘there is someone who likes everyone’ and the second as ‘everyone is liked by someone or other’. The second follows from the first, but not vice versa. This suggests that ‘someone likes everyone’ is ambiguous, in that this string of English words can be used to express two different propositions. This in turn raises difficult questions about what natural language expressions are, and how they can be used to express propositions; see section eight. But for Frege, the important point concerned the distinction between the propositions (Gedanken). Similar remarks apply to ‘∀x∃y[L(x, y)]’ and ‘∃y∀x[L(x, y)]’. A related phenomenon is exhibited by ‘John danced if Mary sang and Chris slept’. Is the intended proposition of the form ‘(A if B) and C’ or ‘A if (B and C)’?  Indeed, it seems that the relation between word-strings and propositions expressed is often one-to-many. Is someone who says ‘The artist drew a club’ talking about a sketch or a card game? One can use ‘is’ to express identity, as in ‘Hesperus is the planet Venus’; but in ‘Hesperus is bright’, ‘is’ indicates predication. In ‘Hesperus is a planet’, ‘a’ seems to be logically inert; yet in ‘John saw a planet’, ‘a’ seems to indicate existential quantification: ∃x[P(x) & S(j,x)]. (One can render ‘Hesperus is a planet’ as ‘∃x[P(x) & h = x]’. But this treats ‘is a planet’ as importantly different than ‘is bright’; and this leads to other difficulties.) According to Frege, such ambiguities provide further evidence that natural language is not suited to the task of representing propositions and inferential relations perspicuously. And he wanted a language that was suited for this task. (Leibniz and others had envisioned a “Characteristica Universalis”, but without detailed proposals for how to proceed beyond syllogistic logic in creating one.) This is not to deny that natural language is well suited for other purposes, perhaps including efficient human communication.  And Frege held that we often do use natural language to express propositions. But he suggested that natural language is like the eye, whereas a good formal language is like a microscope that reveals structure not otherwise observable. On this view, the logical form of a proposition is made manifest by the structure of a sentence in an ideal formal language—what Frege called a Begriffsschrift (concept-script); where the sentences of such a language exhibit function-argument structures that differ in kind from the grammatical structures exhibited by the sentences we use in ordinary communication. The real power of Frege's strategy for representing propositional structure is most evident in his discussions of proofs by induction, the Dedekind-Peano axioms for arithemetic, and how the proposition that every number has a successor is logically related to more basic truths of arithmetic; see the entry on  Frege's theorem and foundations for arithmetic.  But without getting into these details, one can get a sense of Frege's improvement on previous logic by considering (15–16) and Fregean analyses of the corresponding propositions. Suppose that every individual has the following conditional property: if hex is a patient, then some individual is such that shey is both a doctor and respected by himx. Then it follows—intuitively and given the rules of Frege's logic—that every individualx has the following conditional property: if hex is both old and a patient, then some individualy is such that shey is both a doctor and respected by himx. So the proposition expressed with (16) follows from the one expressed with (15). More interestingly, we can also account for why the proposition expressed with (14) follows from the one expressed with (13). For suppose it is false that some individual has the following conjunctive property: hex is a patient; and hex saw every young doctor (i.e., every individualy is such that if shey is a young doctor, then hex was seen by hery); and hex is healthy. Then intuitively, and also given the rules of Frege's logic, it is false that some individual has the following conjunctive property: hex is a patient; and hex saw every doctor; and hex is healthy. This explains why the direction of valid inference is from the more restrictive ‘young doctor’ in (13) to the less restrictive ‘patient’ in (14), despite the fact that in simpler cases, replacing ‘every doctor’ with ‘every young doctor’ is valid. More generally, Frege's logic handles a wide range of inferences that had puzzled medieval logicians. But the Fregean logical forms seem to differ dramatically from the grammatical forms of sentences like (13–16). Frege concluded that we need a Begriffsschrift, distinct from the languages we naturally speak, in order to depict (and help us discern) the structures of the propositions we express by using natural languages. Frege also made a different kind of contribution, which would prove important, to the study of propositions. In early work, he spoke as though propositional constituents were the relevant functions and (ordered n-tuples of) entities that such functions map to truth-values.  But he later refined this view in light of his distinction between Sinn and Bedeutung (see the entry on  Gottlob Frege).  The Sinn of an expression was said to be a “way of presenting” the corresponding Bedeutung, which might be an entity, a truth-value, or a function from (ordered n-tuples of) entities to truth-values. The basic idea is that two names, like ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorus’, can present the same Bedeutung in different ways; in which case, the Sinn of the first name differs from the Sinn of the second. Given this distinction, we can think of ‘Hesperus’ as an expression that presents the evening star (a.k.a. Venus) as such, while ‘Phosphorus’ presents the morning star (also a.k.a. Venus) in a different way. Likewise, we can think of ‘is bright’ as an expression that presents a certain function in a certain way, and ‘Hesperus is bright’ as a sentence that presents its truth-value in a certain way—i.e., as the value of the function in question given the argument in question. From this perspective, propositions are sentential ways of presenting truth-values, and proposition-parts are subsentential ways of presenting functions and arguments. Frege could thus distinguish the proposition that Hesperus is bright from the proposition that Phosphorus is bright, even though the two propositions are alike with regard to the relevant function and argument. Likewise, he could distinguish the trivial proposition Hesperus is Hesperus from the (apparently nontrivial) proposition Hesperus is Phosphorus. This is an attractive view. For intuitively, ancient astronomers were correct not to regard the inference Hesperus is Hesperus, so Hesperus is Phosphorus as an instance of the following valid schema: A, so A. But this raised questions about what the Sinn of an expression really is, what “presentation” could amount to, and what to say about a name with no Bedeutung.