 One ancient idea is that impeccable inferences exhibit patterns that can be characterized schematically by abstracting away from the specific contents of particular premises and conclusions, thereby revealing a general form common to many other impeccable inferences. Such forms, along with the inferences that exemplify them, are said to be valid. Given a valid inference, there is a sense in which the premises contain the conclusion, which is correspondingly extractable from the premises. With regard to (1) and (7), it seems especially clear that the conclusion is part of the first premise, and that the second premise is another part of the first. We can express this point by saying that these inferences are instances of the following form: B if A, and A; so B. The Stoics discussed several patterns of this kind, using ordinal numbers (instead of letters) to capture abstract forms like the ones shown below. If the first then the second, and the first; so the second. If the first then the second, but not the second; so not the first. Either the first or the second, but not the second; so the first. Not both the first and the second, but the first; so not the second. These schematic formulations require variables. And let us introduce ‘proposition’ as a term of art for whatever the variables above, indicated in bold, range over. Propositions are potential premises/conclusions. They can be endorsed or rejected, and they exhibit containment relations of some kind. So presumably, propositions are abstract things that can be evaluated for truth or falsity. This leaves it open what propositions are: sentences, statements, states of affairs, or whatever. But let's assume that declarative sentences can be used to express propositions. (For discussion, see Cartwright (1962) and the essay on  structured propositions.) A significant complication is that in ordinary conversation, the context matters with regard to which proposition is expressed with a given sentence. For example, ‘Pat is asleep’ can be used at one time to express a true premise, and at another time to express a false premise. A given speaker might use ‘I am tired’ to express a false proposition, while another speaker uses the same sentence at the same time to express a true proposition. What counts as being tired can also vary across conversations. Context sensitivity, of various kinds, is ubiquitous in ordinary discourse. Moreover, even given a context, a sentence like ‘He is bald’ may not express a unique proposition. (There may be no referent for the pronoun; and even if there is, the  vagueness of ‘bald’ may yield a range of candidate propositions, with no fact of the matter as to which one is the proposition expressed.) Nonetheless, we can often use sentences like ‘Every circle is an ellipse’ and ‘Thirteen is a prime number’ to express premises of valid arguments. To be sure, ordinary conversation differs from theoretical discourse in mathematics. But the distinction between impeccable and risky inferences is not limited to special contexts in which we try to think especially clearly about especially abstract matters. So when focusing on the phenomenon of valid inference, we can try to simplify the initial discussion by abstracting away from the context sensitivity of language use. Another complication is that in speaking of an inference, one might be talking about (i) a process in which a thinker draws a conclusion from some premises, or (ii) some propositions, one of which is designated as an alleged consequence of the others; see, e.g., Harman (1973). But we can describe a risky thought process as one in which a thinker who accepts certain propositions—perhaps tentatively or hypothetically—comes to accept, on that basis, a proposition that does not follow from the initial premises. And it will be simpler to focus on premises/conclusions, as opposed to episodes of reasoning. With regard to (1), the inference seems secure in part because its first premise has the form ‘B if A’. If the first premise didn't have this form, the inference wouldn't be an instance of ‘B if A, and A; so B’. It isn't obvious that all impeccable inferences are instances of a more general valid form, much less inferences whose impeccability is due to the forms of the relevant propositions. But this thought has served as an ideal for the study of valid inference, at least since Aristotle's treatment of examples like (2). Again, the first premise seems to have several parts, each of which is a part of the second premise or the conclusion. (In English, the indefinite article in ‘Every senator is a politician’ cannot be omitted; likewise for ‘Every politician is a liar’. But at least for now, let's assume that in examples like these, ‘a’ does not itself indicate a propositional constituent.) Aristotle, predating the Stoics, noted that conditional claims like the following are sure to be true: if (the property of) being a politician belongs to every senator, and being deceitful belongs to every politician, then being deceitful belongs to every senator. Correspondingly, the inference pattern below is valid. And inference (2) seems to be valid because its parts exhibit this pattern. Aristotle discussed many such forms of inference, called syllogisms, involving propositions that can be expressed with quantificational words like ‘every’ and ‘some’. For example, the syllogistic patterns below are also valid. Every S is P, and some S is D; so some P is D. Some S is P, and every P is D; so some S is D. Some S is not P, every D is P; so some S is not D. We can rewrite the last two, so that each of the valid syllogisms above is represented as having a first premise of the form ‘Every S is P’. Every S is P, and some D is S; so some D is P. Every S is P, and some D is not P; so some D is not S. But however the inferences are represented, the important point is that the variables—represented here in italics—range over certain parts of propositions. Intuitively, common nouns like ‘politician’ and adjectives like ‘deceitful’ are general terms, since they can apply to more than one individual. And many propositions apparently contain correspondingly general elements. For example, the proposition that every senator is deceitful contains two such elements, both relevant to the validity of inferences involving this proposition. Propositions thus seem to have structure that bears on the validity of inferences, even ignoring premises/conclusions with propositional parts. That is, even simple propositions have logical form. And as Aristotle noted, pairs of such propositions can be related in interesting ways. If every S is P, then some S is P. (For these purposes, assume there is at least one S.) If no S is P, then some S is not P. It is certain that either every S is P or some S is not P; and whichever of these propositions is true, the other is false. Similarly, the following propositions cannot both be true: every S is P; and no S is P. But it isn't certain that either every S is P, or no S is P. Perhaps some S is P, and some S is not P. This network of logical relations strongly suggests that the propositions in question contain a quantificational element and two general elements—and in some cases, an element of negation. This raises the question of whether other propositions have a similar structure.