 Russell’s definition of natural numbers as classes of similar, or equinumerous, classes, first published in (Russell 1901), was his first logical construction, and was the model for those that followed. Similar classes are those that can be mapped one to one onto each other by some relation. The notion of a “one-to-one relation” is defined with logical notions: R is one-one when for every \(x\) there is a unique \(y\) such that \(x \rR y\), and for every such \(y\) in the range of \(\rR\) there is a unique such \(x\). These notions of existence and uniqueness come from logic, and so the notion of number is thus defined solely in terms of classes and of logical notions. Russell announced the goal of his logicist program in The Principles of Mathematics: “the proof that all pure mathematics deals exclusively with concepts definable in terms of a very small number of fundamental logical concepts, and that all its propositions are deducible from a very small number of fundamental logical principles…” (Russell 1903, xv). If  class  is also shown to be a logical notion, then this definition would complete the logicist program for the mathematics of natural numbers. Giuseppe Peano (Peano 1889, 94) had stated axioms for elementary arithmetic, which were later formulated by Russell (1919, 8) as: For Peano these were the axioms of number, which, along with axioms of classes and propositions, describe the properties of these entities and lead to the derivation of theorems that express the other important properties of those entities. Richard Dedekind (Dedekind 1887) had also listed the properties of numbers with similar looking axioms, using the notion of chain, an infinite sequence of sets, each a subset of the next, that is well ordered and has the structure of the natural numbers. Dedekind then proves that the principle of induction (Axiom 5 above) holds for chains. (See entry on  Dedekind).  Although Russell finds it “most remarkable that Dedekind’s previous assumptions suffice to demonstrate this theorem” (Russell 1903, §236), he compares the two approaches, of Peano and Dedekind, with respect to simplicity and their differing ways of treating mathematical induction, and concludes that: But from a purely logical point of view, the two methods seem equally sound; and it is to be remembered that, with the logical theory of cardinals, both Peano’s and Dedekind’s axioms become demonstrable. (Russell 1903, §241) It was Peano and Dedekind that Russell had in mind when he later speaks of “the method of ‘postulating’” when he compares the “advantages” of their method over construction as those of theft over honest toil. To complete his project Russell needed to find definitions and some “very small number of fundamental logical principles” (Russell 1903, xv) and then produce the required derivations. Finding an adequate definition of classes with the “no-classes theory” and the principles of logic needed to derive the properties of numbers and classes was only completed with Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and Russell 1910–13). This construction of numbers was a clear example of defining entities as classes of others so as to be able to prove certain properties as theorems of logic rather than having to rest with the theft of hypotheses. With the device of contextual definition from the theory of descriptions Russell then eliminated classes too, taking as fundamental the logical notion of a propositional function and so showing that the principles of classes where a part of logic.