 The most influential figure in logical AI is John McCarthy. McCarthy was one of the founders of AI, and consistently advocated a research methodology that uses logical techniques to formalize the reasoning problems that AI needs to solve. All but the most recent work in McCarthy’s research program can be found in  Lifschitz 1990a,  which also contains an introduction to McCarthy’s work  Lifschitz 1990b;  for additional historical background, see  Israel 1991. McCarthy’s methodological position has not changed substantially since it was first articulated in  McCarthy 1959  and elaborated and amended in  McCarthy & Hayes 1969.  The motivation for using logic is that—even if the eventual implementations do not directly and simply use logical reasoning techniques like theorem proving—a logical formalization helps us to understand the reasoning problem itself. The claim is that without an understanding of what the reasoning problems are, it will not be possible to implement their solutions. Plausible as this Platonic argument may seem, it is in fact controversial in the context of AI; an alternative methodology would seek to learn or evolve the desired behaviors. The representations and reasoning that this methodology would produce might well be too complex to characterize or to understand at a conceptual level. From  McCarthy & Hayes 1969,  it is clear that McCarthy thought of his methodology for AI as overlapping to a large extent with traditional philosophy, but adding to it the need to inform the design of programs capable of manifesting general intelligence. This idea is not uncongenial to some philosophers (see, for instance,  Carnap 1956 (pp. 244–247) and  Pollock 1995).  In practice, the actual theories that have emerged from McCarthy’s methodology are influenced most strongly by work in philosophical logic, and the research tradition in logical AI represents a more or less direct development of this work, with some changes in emphasis. This review will concentrate on logical AI in relation to philosophical logic, without further comment on relations to philosophy in general or to the feasibility of developing human-level intelligent systems. McCarthy’s long-term objective was to formalize common sense reasoning, the prescientific reasoning that is used in dealing with everyday problems. An early example of such a problem, mentioned in  McCarthy 1959,  is getting from home to the airport. Other examples include: Stated baldly, the goal of formalizing common sense would probably seem outrageous to most philosophers, who are trained to think of common sense as rather elusive. But whether or not the ultimate goal is appropriate and achievable, the specific formalization projects that have emerged from this program have been successful in several ways.  They have succeeded in breaking new territory for logic by extending the scope of the reasoning problems to which logical techniques can be successfully applied. They have demonstrated that logical techniques can contribute usefully to the solution of specific AI problems—planning is the most successful of these, but some success has been achieved in other areas as well.[11] They form the basis of one approach to developing complete, autonomous agents.[12] And they have illuminated many specific forms of nonscientific reasoning—for instance, qualitative reasoning about the behavior of physical devices.[13] Although McCarthy has advocated this program of formalization since 1959—an almost prehistorical date for AI—the program has not been taken on board and pursued by a dedicated community until recently.  Research in this area has gained much momentum since 1990. For further discussion and details, see   Section 8.