 In  Section 4.6,  we traced the reasons for the development of theories incorporating causality in work on reasoning about action and change. This is not the only area of AI in which causality has emerged. Causality figures in qualitative reasoning about devices; for Herbert Simon’s important work in this area, which goes back to the 1950s, see  Simon 1952;  1977;  Iwasaki & Simon 1986.  Both these traditions are important. But the most robust and highly developed program in AI relating to causality is that of Judea Pearl and his students and associates, which derives from statistical techniques known as structural equation models.   Halpern and Pearl 2001 introduced the idea that causal relations among events could be inferred from these models: Bayesian belief networks could be interpreted as  causal networks. Pearl’s program has developed into a far-reaching campaign to rehabilitate causality in statistical thinking. We shall not discuss this topic here. For one thing, this survey omits probabilistic reasoning in AI. For another, Pearl’s views on causality are systematically and comprehensively presented in a recent book-length study,  Pearl 2000. But it is important to point out that the work on causality discussed  in  Section 4.6  and Pearl’s ideas do share some common themes. On both approaches: action is central for causality. Also there is a focus on causality as a tool in reasoning that is necessitated in part by limited resources. Another important theme is the deployment and systematic study of formalisms in which causality is related to other constructs (in particular, to probability and to qualitative change) and a variety of realistic reasoning problems are addressed. These commonalities provide reason to hope that we will see a science of causality emerging from the AI research, unifying the contributions of the probabilistic, the qualitative physics, and the nonmonotonic traditions, and illuminating the various phases of causal reasoning. A recent landmark in this direction is  Halpern 2016, which develops and applies the general theory of event causality that arises from the causal network approach.  Although Halpern is a computer scientist,  a large part of this book is philosophical, exploring notions such as blame and explanation.  But the book also explores practical applications of the approach that would not occur to philosophers, in areas such as software fault diagnosis. Whether you take causality to be a fundamental construct in natural science, or a fundamental common sense phenomenon, depends on whether you have in mind an idealized nature described by differential equations or you have in mind the view of nature we have to take in order to act, either in everyday situations, or for that matter in designing experiments in the laboratory. The fact that, as Bertrand Russell noted (see  Russell 1957), causality is not to be found as a theoretical primitive in contemporary physical theories is at odds with its seeming importance in so many familiar areas of reasoning. The rigorous theories emerging in AI that are beginning to illuminate the workings of causality are important not only in themselves, but in their potentiality to illuminate wider philosophical issues.