 Zalta (1999) proposes an interestingly different, because modal-logical, route to the natural numbers. Although Zalta does not himself classify it as such, his approach would appear to warrant the adjective ‘neo-logicist’. (We prescind from questions about the logical status of modal logic.) Zalta employs a classical second-order modal logic (S5) with identity, and with both the first-order Barcan ‘formula’, or axiom-scheme and its second-order correlate The first-order Barcan formula forces one to interpret quantifiers as ranging over all possible individuals, whatever world one is ‘in’—no ‘expansion’ or ‘contraction’ of the domain can be involved as one traverses the accessibility relation from possible world to possible world. The logic is free, and descriptive terms (the description operator ι is primitive) are interpreted rigidly—that is, the denotation of a descriptive term in the actual world, if it has one there, is its denotation in any other possible world. There are the usual alethic modalities □ and ◊ of necessity and possibility (as interpreted by S5, of course), and the actuality operator A. The relation xF of encoding can hold between an abstract object x and a property F. Ax will mean that x is an abstract object. The properties that an abstract object encodes are constitutive of its nature, and as such, are essential to its identity as an object. (Zalta 1993: 396) For example, Plato’s Form of a Triangle encodes the property of being a triangle, but does not exemplify it. Among Zalta’s fundamental principles are the following. Zalta defines an equinumerosity relation ≈ among properties with respect to ordinary objects—that is, the possibly concrete ones. With ≈ in hand, Zalta offers the notion of a (cardinal) number (Zalta 1993: 630): Numbers(x,G) ≡df Ax ∧ ∀F(xF ↔ F ≈ G). It follows that x numbers G just in case x is an abstract object that encodes exactly the properties equinumerous to G (where, nota bene, equinumerosity is judged only with respect to the ordinary objects). And it follows easily from Zalta’s first principles that “for every property G, there is a unique object which numbers G”. Zalta’s system delivers Hume’s Principle: #F = #G ↔ F ≈ G, and the following obvious corollary: ∀G∃y(y = #G). In this regard Zalta’s system is as powerful as Wright’s: they both guarantee for every property its number. Wright, however, begins with Hume’s Principle as a first principle, whereas Zalta derives Hume’s Principle (as Frege originally did) from his own ‘more basic’ (and possibly more powerful) principles. We note the following three points, in concluding our exposition of Zalta’s system. In his sense of ‘concrete’ and ‘abstract’, In points (2) and (3), Zalta departs explicitly from Frege and all other (neo-)logicists discussed above.