 It would be a mistake to see Russell’s logical constructions as the product of the converse operation of a method that begins with logical analysis. Analysis was indeed the distinctive method of Russell’s realist and atomistic philosophy with the method of construction appearing only later. Russell’s new philosophy was self-consciously in opposition to the Hegelianism prevailing in philosophy at Cambridge at the end of the nineteenth century (Russell 1956, 11–13). Russell first needed to defend the process of analysis, and to argue against the view of the idealists that complex entities are in fact “organic unities” and that any analysis of these unities loses something, as the slogan was “analysis is falsification”. (1903, §439) The subject of our analysis is reality, rather than merely our own ideas: All complexity is conceptual in the sense that it is due to a whole capable of logical analysis, but is real in the sense that it has no dependence on the mind, but only upon the nature of the object. Where the mind can distinguish elements, there must be different elements to distinguish; though, alas! there are often different elements which the mind does not distinguish. (1903, §439) As ultimate constituents of reality are what is discovered by logical analysis, logical construction cannot be the converse operation, for undoing the analysis by putting things back together only returns us to the complex entities with which we began. What then is the point of constructing what has already been analyzed? The distinction made here between analysis and construction deliberately side-steps and important discussion among scholars of Frege and Russell about the nature of analysis. Frege held, in his Foundations of Arithmetic (1884, §64), that a proposition about identity of numbers could be also analyzed as one about the similarity of classes. He describes this as “recarving ” one and the same content in different ways. Later Frege asserted that the same thought could be viewed as the result of the application of a function to an argument in different ways. As the logical form of a thought is the result of the application of concepts to arguments, this means that distinct logical forms are assigned to the same thought. To resolve the apparent conflict with Frege’s famous thesis of  compositionality , that a thought is built up from its constituents in a fashion that by and large follows its syntactic form, Michael Dummett (1981, chapter 15) distinguishes two notions of analysis in Frege, one as “analysis” proper, the other as “decomposition”. Peter Hylton (2005, 43) argues that there is a problematic notion of analysis in Russell, with it being very difficult to say that sentences containing definite descriptions have the complicated quantificational structures assigned to them in “On Denoting” (1905) as their “real structure”. Michael Beaney, in his introduction to (2007, 8) gives the names “decompositional” and “transformative” to two kinds of analysis in his introduction to papers that discuss the significance of this distinction for Russell. James Levine claims that in fact the first form of analysis, by which the project is to find the ultimate constituents of propositions, belongs to an early project of “Moorean Analysis” that Russell abandoned early. Indeed, by the time of the account of numbers as classes of equinumerous classes, Russell had already adopted what Levine calls “Russell’s Post-Peano Analysis ”. This debate is certainly relevant to the study of Frege’s philosophy, and its connections with Russell’s role as a founder of Analytic Philosophy as a movement, but it is perhaps out of keeping with Russell’s own use of the terminology of “analysis”. While Peter Strawson, in his “On Referring”(1950) makes numerous allusions to Russell’s “analysis” of definite descriptions, in fact the term does not appear in “On Denoting”. Russell refers to his “theory” of descriptions, and acknowledges that it is not a proposal that will be recognized immediately as what we have always meant by such sentences, but instead says of his somewhat complicated use of quantifiers and identity symbols that: He then goes on to defend his theory by “dealing” with the three puzzles including the famous example of whether “The present King of France is bald” is true or false. At no point does he appeal to what a speaker may have in mind upon uttering one of these sentences. As a result of these facts, it seems that Russell’s methodology is best understood by analogy with the logical approach to scientific theories. On this model the result of “logical analysis” will be the definitions and primitive propositions or axioms from which the laws of a formalized scientific theory can be derived by logical inference. The reduction of one theory to another consists of rewriting the axioms of the target theory using the language of the reducing theory, and then proving them as theorems of that reducing theory. Construction, then, is best seen as the process of choosing definitions so that previously primitive statements can be derived as theorems. (See Hager 1994 and Russell 1924.) This picture fits best with this linguistically oriented notion of “theory construction” rather than the project of philosophical analysis. It also follows the use of the notion of construction in the tradition of mathematics. Euclid prefaces each demonstration with a “construction” of a figure that features in the following proof. Gottlob Frege begins every proof in his Basic Laws of Arithmetic (1893) with an “Analysis”, which informally explains the notions used in the theorems and the strategy of the derivation, followed by the actual, gapless proof, which is called the “Construction”. Historically, then, there is no notion of a construction as a synthetic stage following an analytic stage as two processes of a comparable nature, but leading in opposite directions. Even when described in terms of stages of theory construction, analysis and logical construction are not simply converse operations. Russell stresses that the objects discovered and distinguished in analysis are “real” as are their differences from each other. Thus there is a constraint on the “choice” of definitions and primitive propositions with which to begin. The relationships between a deductive system and a realistic ontology differ among the various cases that Russell lists as examples of logical constructions. Propositions and “complexes” such as facts are analyzed in order to find the real objects and relations of which they are composed. A logical construction, on the other hand, results in a theory from which truths follow by logical inferences. The truths that are part of a deductive system resulting from logical construction are only “reconstructions” of some of the “pre-theoretic” truths that are to be analyzed. It is only their deductive relations, in particular their deducibility from the axioms of the theory, that are relevant to the success of a construction. Logical constructions do not capture all of the features of the pre-theoretic entities with which one begins. Much of the attention to logical construction has focused on whether it is in fact a unified methodology for philosophy that will introduce a “scientific method in philosophy” as Russell says in the subtitle of (Russell 1914b). Commentators from Fritz (1952) through Sainsbury (1979) have denied that Russell’s various constructions fit into a unified methodology, as well as questioning the applicability of the language of “fiction” and “incomplete symbol” to all examples. Below it will be shown how, nevertheless, constructions do fall into several natural families that are described by various of these terms with a considerable degree of accuracy.