 The neo-Fregean revival began in earnest with  Wright.[37]  Wright (1983) sought to derive the Dedekind-Peano axioms for successor arithmetic from what was called N= and has since come to be known as Hume’s Principle (that is, Parsons’s principle (A) above): Wright sketched a derivation of the Dedekind-Peano axioms from Hume’s Principle. The deductions sketched would be carried out in standard second-order logic—‘standard’ in the sense that, in the presence of HP, all number-abstractive terms of the form #xΦ(x) can be proved to denote. Such a system is unfree with respect to its number-abstractive terms. This point holds even if the second-order logic in question is a free logic in the official sense of not being committed to the theorem-scheme ∃!t (i.e., ∃x x = t) for any well-formed singular term t. The proof of this point is short and easy, and is like the one given in  §1.2.3.  We shall given an informal version as follows. Clearly, the identity relation is a one-one correspondence of the Φs onto the Φs. Therefore it is a theorem of second-order logic that ∃R(R maps the Φs 1–1 onto the Φs). This is the right-hand side of that instance of HP whose left-hand side is #xΦ(x) = #xΦ(x). The latter has now been established as a theorem-scheme of second-order logic with HP. Hence in this system we have the theorem-scheme ∃!#xΦ(x). The over-arching theme is that we can redeem Frege’s key philosophical insights concerning (natural and real) numbers and our knowledge of them, despite Russell’s discovery of paradox in Frege’s own theory of classes. That paradox notwithstanding, numbers are still logical objects, characterized by methods or principles of abstraction—which of course cannot be as ambitious as Frege’s Basic Law V. These principles afford a distinctive form of epistemic access to numbers. The usual mathematical axioms governing the two kinds of numbers are to be derived as results in (higher-order) logic—essentially following Frege’s deductive plan. These derivations will exploit appropriate definitions of the primitive constants, functions, and predicates of the brand of number theory concerned. (For example: 0, 1; s, +, ×; <; N(x); ℝ(x).) The main difference is this: the neo-Fregean no longer accepts Frege’s definition of numbers as classes of equinumerous classes. Instead, the numbers are vouchsafed as sui generis, courtesy of newly chosen abstraction principles. The Wrightian neo-logicist (henceforth: the HP-er) opts for HP; the constructive logicist opts, much more modestly, for rules permitting the introduction of zero and of successors. Apart from this key difference, however, the neo-Fregeans hew in other places quite closely to Frege’s overall deductive strategy when deriving the Dedekind-Peano postulates. No supplementation by intuition or sensory experience will be needed in the derivations of these postulates. The trains of reasoning involved will depend only on our grasp of logical validities, supplemented by appropriate definitions. Purported result (for the HP-er): because HP is analytic, logicism is vindicated; and the mathematical knowledge derived in this way is revealed to be analytic, not synthetic. For reservations about this claimed result, however, see Boolos (1997). The main objection with which the HP-er needs to contend is that Hume’s Principle is neither a logical nor an analytic truth. It cannot be logical, so the objection would go, because it has such a huge ledger of ontological commitments: for every concept, its alleged number. And it cannot be analytic, because the two sides of the biconditional have different ontological commitments: the right-hand side has no commitments to numbers, while the left-hand side is brimming with such commitments. In order to defend against these objections, the HP-er needs to do two things. First—as any logicist needs to do—he needs to challenge the dogma that no logical principle can carry any ontological commitments. Secondly, he needs to provide an account of analyticity according to which a biconditional can be analytic even when the explicit ontological commitments of each side of the biconditional differ. (These commitments are to be judged by considering each side as a sentence in the restricted language whose vocabulary is just sufficient to allow the sentence in question to be formed.) The HP-er advocates Hume’s Principle in its unrestricted form, and is thereby committed, as we have seen, to the existence of a denotation for every term of the form {x | Φ(x)}. The HP-er is committed, not only to the number of all natural numbers, but also to the number of all self-identical things—or, at least, so Wright was in Wright (1983). This ‘universal number’ #x(x = x) is sometimes called ‘anti-zero’. In n. 5 on p. 187 one reads It is worth stressing that it is, of course, absolutely essential that there be such a number as Nx : x = x; for it is impossible to imagine what sort of ground there could be for admitting Nx : x ≠ x if that were in doubt. Boolos (1987), after raising qualms about the universal number, provided an ingenious model (which had been anticipated informally by Geach (1975: 446–7)) to allay the misgiving about the consistency of full second-order logic with HP (the system now known as FA, for ‘Frege Arithmetic’). Simply take the natural numbers along with the distinct object ω as the elements of the domain. The element ω serves as the denotation of any term of the form #xΦ(x) where Φ is satisfied by infinitely many elements. Note, however, that this consistency proof works only when FA is taken on its  own.[38]  The Geach–Boolos model cannot be relied upon to secure the consistency of FA in conjunction with other theories, such as set theory, that one might wish to extend with FA. Since, however, counting finite extensions ought to be a universally applicable intellectual operation, regardless of subject matter, it will be the exception rather than the rule that FA is to be applied only to the natural numbers (plus, perhaps, the unnatural factotum ω). Rather, FA should be applicable not only to concrete objects, but also to abstract mathematical entities such as real numbers and sets. Provided only that one has a criterion of identity for the objects in question, one should be in a position to count any finite collection of them. Subsequently, in Hale and Wright 2001 (p. 315), Wright expressed reservations over whether “x = x” counts as a sortal predicate eligible to be prefixed by “the number of x such that”. Now Wright was inquiring after what “is wanted for the exorcism of anti-zero” (p. 314, emphasis added). His considered answer is that a term of the form #xFx will denote a number only if the concept F is both sortal and not indefinitely  extensible.[39]  So Wright subsequently hoped to make actual what he had previously alleged to be impossible to imagine. The technical proposal must therefore be that Hume’s Principle is to be restricted to predicates that (express concepts that) are both sortal and not indefinitely extensible. But this, of course, raises the question whether there is an effective method for determining, of any given predicate F, whether F (expresses a concept that) is both sortal and not indefinitely extensible. In the absence of any such effective method, the theory will not have been axiomatized. This survey perforce confines itself, in the main, to (neo-)logicist accounts of the natural numbers. But it is worth raising one more question about the extension of a neo-Fregean account in an attempt to cope with the real numbers. We shall call it the inclusion question. How is one to appreciate that the natural numbers qua reals are (in the non-punning sense of numerical identity) the natural numbers vouchsafed by logicism about the  naturals?[40]  This question is not answered by the neo-Fregean abstractionist account of the reals in Shapiro (2000). In that account, the various new abstracta are abstracted from quite varying equivalence relations, and no attempt is made to leave it open as a possibility that the natural number n is the integer n, is the rational number n, and is the real number n. (Although on p. 339 Shapiro writes that he proposes “to avoid the issue [of identity under inclusion] here”, his proposed treatment nevertheless answers the inclusion question negatively.) One issue that is not satisfactorily disposed of, is this: in what sense can Wright’s neo-Fregean logicist claim to be furnishing an epistemic foundation for, let us say, first-order Peano arithmetic, if their axiomatic principle HP, along with the second-order logic employed (=FA), puts the supposed ‘foundation’ much higher in the hierarchy of consistency-strengths than the weaker theory being ‘founded’? (This is to raise once again the worry expressed by Boolos (1997:  248–9).)[41] It is an age-old tradition in foundational investigations to provide a foundation that is not only obviously consistent, but obviously true, and from which all the results in the branch(es) of mathematics being founded will follow logically. Moreover, this following logically is itself something that must be epistemically accessible—hence the importance of checkable proof. A foundational effort can be directed at many different branches of mathematics simultaneously, or just at some particular branch, such as arithmetic. In the former case, it is understandable if the foundational theory chosen (such as ZFC) has a higher consistency strength in relation to any one branch of mathematics being founded. But if the effort is directed at just that one branch (say, arithmetic), then the foundation provided should be of a consistency-strength that is as low as possible, in relation to that branch. The consistency-strength of FA is that of second-order arithmetic Z2 (i.e., real analysis), which is equal to that of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the Axiom of Power Sets. The consistency-strength of first-order Peano arithmetic is much weaker, namely that of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the Axiom of Power Sets and without the Axiom of Infinity. By adopting second-order logic along with Hume’s Principle in an unrestricted form, Wright incurred commitment (as a matter of analyticity) not only to each natural number, seriatim, but also to the cardinal number of any concept whatsoever. We know now, however, that Gödel’s prescient ‘completionary’ insight has long since been fully borne out. The insight in question was that the set-theorist’s key to proving stronger and stronger results in mathematics—and in particular the consistency of each newly attained system—is to postulate the existence of ever-larger cardinal numbers. If all these cardinals were available across the board courtesy of Hume’s Principle applied to appropriately expressed concepts, then Wright would be proposing a foundational theory of enormous strength. The only reason why FA is not even more powerful than Z2 is that the former system’s ontology is being generated solely by the abstractions. There is no other source of existential postulation, as there would be if one were to add, say, set theory to the theoretical mix. Upon such addition further care would be needed when considering the nature of Wright’s transfinite cardinals begotten by Hume’s Principle. As the investigations of Kit Fine (1998: 515; 2002) have revealed, any attempt to combine such an abstractive account of transfinite cardinals with set theory must resort to treating the abstracted cardinals as Urelemente rather than as sets. Set theory cannot, by itself, provide a set-surrogate for every transfinite cardinal that would be generated by Hume’s Principle. Another and rather different line of criticism of the claim that HP is analytic can be found in Mancosu (2016: Chapter 4). Ironically, Mancosu advances what he calls a Good Company objection to HP. HP jostles for primacy with at least infinitely many ‘Good Companion’ abstraction principles. They are good because, like HP, they permit the logical derivation of the Dedekind-Peano axioms. They do so via their respective ‘number’-abstraction operators with predicates whose extensions are (Dedekind-)finite. They assign such extensions the right natural numbers as their cardinal numbers. When that operator is applied to a predicate whose extension is (Dedekind-)infinite, however, these other principles give results arbitrarily different from what one would expect from the more Cantorian principle HP. HP and these Good Companions get matters right on all finite extensions. But the Good Companions give rise to a confusing variety of ‘number’-assignments to infinite extensions. The problem for the HP-er, as Mancosu sees it, is how to maintain the case for the analyticity of HP in light of all this good company. We see here another manifestation of the epistemological worry that HP is of excessive consistency strength when the logicist project is simply to furnish a deeper but analytic foundation for Dedekind-Peano arithmetic. All that such a foundation requires is what HP and these competing Good Companion principles agree upon—namely, that predicates with (Dedekind-)finite extensions should get the right numbers assigned to them (i.e., the natural numbers). There is no need for the logicist about Dedekind-Peano arithmetic to make pronouncements about any infinite numbers. Mancosu’s Good Companions to HP arise only because he shares with the HP-er a fundamental logical commitment: every singular term of the language must denote. This means that the logic furnishing the supposed logicist foundation for arithmetic is not a free logic. Every singular term formed by applying the number-abstraction operator to a predicate is taken to stand for some object. This refusal to adopt a free logic complicates matters unduly if ones sees as part of the logicist project the task of generating only epistemically justifiable commitment to numbers as abstract existents. We want, as it were, to be able to recognize only those numbers whose existential credentials are absolutely compelling. In particular, the logicist should be able to deliver only the natural numbers, when furnishing deeper logical derivations of the Dedekind-Peano postulates.