 We begin this section with some remarks about Gentzenian proof theory. This is not because it played any direct role in the development of logicism—far from it—but because we seek in this section to describe in broad terms a different kind of neo-logicism that draws more heavily on proof-theoretic resources. It was only with the work of Gerhard Gentzen in the early 1930s (see Gentzen 1934, 1935) that researchers in foundations were equipped with formal calculi of deduction that could do real justice to the actual structure of inferential dependencies within mathematical proofs. What we have in mind here are the dependencies of conclusions upon both premises and assumptions that may have been made only “for the sake of argument”. A good example of assumptions of the latter kind are reductio assumptions (assume φ; derive absurdity; conclude ¬φ, now independently of φ). It is extraordinary that the community of mathematical logicians took so long to discover the calculi of natural deduction (and the sequent calculi), once Frege, in 1879, had cracked the previously hidden grammatical code of multiply quantified sentences. It is remarkable that Gödel, in 1929, could have demonstrated the completeness of first-order logic before Gentzen’s natural formulation of it, when that logic was available only in the forms of the highly unnatural deductive calculi devised by Frege, by Hilbert, and by Russell and Whitehead. The essential breakthrough of Gentzen’s treatment was to characterize each logical operator in isolation, with rules of its own, rules in which only that operator would explicitly feature. Moreover, the rules in question would deal only with a single occurrence (in dominant position) of the operator in question. The rule for reasoning to a conclusion with the operator dominant was called the operator’s introduction rule; while the rule for reasoning from a premise with the operator dominant was called its elimination rule. The introduction and elimination rules for any logical operator have to be in a certain kind of equilibrium, an equilibrium that lends itself to an interpretation of the rules as matching the inferential obligations of any responsible, rational and sincere speaker to the inferential entitlements of any responsible, rational and trusting  listener.[42] The equilibrium in question is explicated by the so-called reduction procedures for the logical operators. These procedures enable one to remove from a proof any sentence occurrence that stands both as the conclusion of an application of an introduction rule and as the major premise of an application of the corresponding elimination rule. Repeated application of the procedures will eventually turn the proof into one that is in normal form—essentially, one that is not eligible for any further application of the  procedures.[43]  The significance of proofs in normal form is that they represent direct deductive routes from their premises to their conclusions. Powerful, incisive and revolutionary though Gentzen’s approach has since proved to be, it was, in its turn, curiously limited. It was restricted to just the universally acknowledged logical operators of first-order logic: ¬, ∧, ∨, →, ∃ and ∀. At exactly the same time there appeared Carnap (1934), Logische Syntax der Sprache, which offered an account of analyticity for languages in which all logico-mathematical operators could make similar contributions to the status of a sentence as analytically true (or analytically false). Carnap, however, did this by employing axiomatizations involving all the various logico-mathematical operators, co-functioning in grammatically complex axioms. His approach was therefore quite unlike the more ‘natural’ one of Gentzen, which was single-operator focused. Moreover, the unnatural approach was still Carnap’s preferred choice in work as late as his Foundations of Logic and Mathematics (Carnap  1939).[44]  We mention Carnap in contrast with Gentzen here because of Gentzen’s tragic early death at the end of the Second World War. Who knows how Gentzen might have extended his exquisitely conceived inferentialist techniques to items on the broad logicist agenda? His writings appeared in English translation only in 1969 (see Gentzen 1934/1935 [1969]). Carnap, however, did survive to exert considerable influence on the thinking of a new generation of philosophers of mathematics on the problems and prospects for logicism; and he was able to do so from the mid-1930s, in the USA, writing in English. After the early 1940s, proof theory did not broaden and diversify so as to address a potentially fertile agenda: an investigation of the various forms that introduction and elimination rules might take, as it examines rule-governed expressions whose rules are not quite so neatly classifiable as introduction and elimination rules. This is the case, for example, with families of ‘coeval’ and interdependent concepts of a nevertheless logico-mathematical kind. An example of such a family is that of the ordered pair of any two things; the first member of any ordered pair; and the second member of the same. An important feature of this example, and of other examples that could be given, is that the operators in question are term-forming operators. Gentzen had confined his study to sentence-forming operators. Perhaps it was Tarski’s theory of truth for formalized languages (see Tarski 1956 [1933]) that deflected interest away from further development of this essentially inferentialist approach to the meanings of logical and mathematical operators. An inferentialist approach holds special appeal for the semantic anti-realist. According to Michael Dummett’s influential characterization of semantic realism, the realist is one who believes that every declarative sentence of one’s language is determinately true or false, independently of our means of coming to know which. This is what is supposed to justify the realist’s use of strictly classical logical principles such as the Law of Excluded Middle. The anti-realist, by contrast, insists that all truths are knowable; and is quick to point out that we do not have any effective method for deciding the truth or falsity of statements in mathematics. Anti-realists, accordingly, reject the Law of Excluded Middle (and all other strictly classical rules that are intuitionistically equivalent to it), and advocate the use of intuitionistic or constructive logic, rather than classical logic. An anti-realist concerned to demonstrate the analyticity of the basic laws of arithmetic would inquire whether one can eschew strictly classical passages of inference when deriving the Peano postulates. For, if those postulates are analytically true, then the anti-realist would expect to attain them by means of rules justifiable by appeal only to the constructive contents involved (see Rumfitt 1999). And indeed the anti-realist can. She can avoid recourse to the full power of Hume’s Principle. The innocuous ingredients of the conceptual content of Hume’s Principle, insofar as finite numbers are concerned, will find expression in the inferential rules that the anti-realist lays down for zero, #, and successor. Heyting arithmetic, after all, has exactly the same axioms as Peano arithmetic, and is the logical closure of those axioms under intuitionistic, rather than classical, logic. The two systems PA and HA differ only in respect of the logic used for closure. It would be rather odd if the intuitionist were debarred from being a logicist in the sense at issue here. The pursuit of analyticity in the foundations of arithmetic is one that could be very well served by the proof-theoretic methods favored by the Dummettian anti-realist’s theory of meaning. Central to such a proof-theoretic approach is the formulation of inferential rules governing all the expression-forming operators in question—rules that come, preferably, in introduction-elimination pairs. The rules are constitutive of the respective operators’ meanings; whence results proved solely by means of those rules qualify as analytic. A question that will be raised by any alert meaning-theorist, therefore, is the following: Might there not be some anti-realist (constructive, or intuitionistic) derivation, in Fregean spirit, of the basic laws of arithmetic by appeal to suitable meaning-constituting rules of inference that conform to the general requirements of an anti-realist theory of meaning? Anti-realist doctrine invites such extension to the mathematical expressions in fundamental theories such as arithmetic. It could give Fregean logicists what they are seeking: fundamental derivations of the Dedekind-Peano postulates from more basic logical principles, logical principles that are at least as secure, epistemically, as the mathematical postulates they are seeking to derive. A theory of this kind, called constructive logicism, was presented in Tennant (1987). Its distinguishing features may be summarized as follows. Constructive logicism is based on rules of natural deduction that are arguably analytic of the central notions zero, successor, and number. There are also rules that pin down the meaning of the number-term-forming operator #xΦ(x) (the number of Φs). In the terminology introduced above, the rules for #x amount to a single-abstraction identity principle. The remaining rules are allowed to carry only very local and modest ontological commitment, on the grounds that it is part of the very meaning of a term such as ‘0’ that its use in the language commits one to the existence of the number 0. Here, for example, are the natural-deduction rules governing zero. ‘⊥’ is the symbol for absurdity. In order to temper the modest commitment just mentioned, all derivations are constructed within a free logic, so that all existential commitments other than those incurred by the rules themselves would have to be made  explicit.[46]  All of the existential commitments that the constructive logicist incurs in this way will be incurred, anyway, by the HP-er who advocates Hume’s Principle in its unrestricted form. Recall that the HP-er is committed, not only to the number of all natural numbers, but also to the number of all self-identical things. The ontological bill for the constructive logicist is much more modest, compared to that of the HP-er. The constructive logicist is not even committed (by the rules he lays down) to the existence of the number of all natural numbers. Commitment is incurred (by employing Frege’s trick) to the natural numbers seriatim, as necessary existents. No commitment is incurred, however, to any other cardinal numbers. Chapter 25 of Tennant (1987), titled “On deriving the basic laws of arithmetic: Or, how to Frege–Wright a Dedekind-Peano”, provides detailed formal derivations of the Dedekind-Peano axioms, within a free, intuitionistic relevant logic. All the derivations given are intuitionistic, in conformity with the anti-realist aspirations explained above, and in order to warrant the adjective ‘constructive’ in the phrase ‘constructive logicism’. Heck (1997b) dealt with so-called ‘finite Frege arithmetic’. His treatment was classical. But Heck was concerned, as constructive logicism had been, to derive the basic laws of arithmetic while incurring ontological commitment only to the natural numbers. To this end Heck restricted Hume’s Principle to predicates with finite extensions. It is therefore natural to conjecture that constructive logicism is the intuitionistic (relevant) fragment of Heck’s finite Frege arithmetic. Tennant (1987) argues that a condition of adequacy for any logicist theory is to explain the applicability of the finite cardinals (see p. 234). Let ∃nxFx be the formula of first-order logic with identity, defined inductively in the usual way, that says that there are exactly n Fs. Let n be the numeral denoting the natural number n, that is, “s…s0”, with n occurrences of the successor symbol s. Schema N is the following biconditional, an instance of which is obtained by fixing on a particular natural number n and open formula Φ. Schema N: #xΦx = n ↔ ∃nxΦx. An adequate theory of number would allow one to derive every instance of Schema  N;[47]  and the theory of constructive logicism does that. Tennant suggests that this constitutes a solution to the problem of the applicability of natural numbers in counting finite collections. All the logicist accounts discussed so far dealt only with zero, successor, and “…is a natural number”. But there are important differences among them. It is not at all clear that constructive logicism has the same high consistency-strength of Frege Arithmetic. There appears to be no way to derive, within the constructive logicist system, an existence claim of the form where the extension of F is an infinite set (such as the set of all natural numbers). Contrast this with the fact that FA proves The present author therefore conjectures that the consistency-strength of this system is lower than that of FA. In Tennant (2009), the constructive logicist treatment is extended to deal with both addition and multiplication. The key innovation is a ‘logic of orderly pairing’: a system of natural-deduction rules of inference governing the formation of the ordered pair π(t,u) from existing objects t and u, and the projections λ(u) of the left, and ρ(u) of the right, member of any ordered pair u.