 Just as signification corresponds most closely – though not exactly – to contemporary ideas of meaning or sense, so supposition corresponds in some ways to modern notions of reference, denotation and extension. The comparison is far from exact, however. One major difference is that the medievals distinguished many different modes (modi) of supposition. Despite the difference between different authors' semantic theories, particularly as they developed over the centuries, there is a remarkable consistency in the terminology and interrelation of the different modes. The major division is between material, simple and personal supposition. Material supposition is when a term stands for a linguistic item as such. Often, of course, this will be a case of autonymy, when it stands for itself. William Sherwood writes: “It is called material when a word itself supposits either [A] for the very utterance itself or [B] for the word itself, composed of the utterance and the signification – as if we were to say [A] ‘man is a monosyllable’ or [B] ‘man is a name’” (tr. Kretzmann, p.  107).[14]  Writing in Paris nearly a hundred years later, Thomas Maulfelt put it like this: “Material supposition is a term standing for itself or for another similar to it in sound or writing suppositing in the same way or otherwise which it was not imposed to signify or for some other sound which is not inferior to it, and which it does not signify naturally and properly” (my  translation).[15]  ‘Noun’ supposits materially for itself when we say ‘Noun has four letters’ – or ‘The term “noun” has four letters’; it doesn't supposit materially, but personally for itself, when we say ‘A noun is a part of speech’. Simple and personal supposition are sometimes grouped together as “formal supposition” (in contrast to material). Simple supposition is harder to characterize generally. A common description is to say it occurs when a term supposits for the universal or form which it signifies. However, not everyone believed that terms signified universals. (See the entry on the  Medieval Problem of Universals.)  So whereas William of Sherwood wrote “It is simple when a word supposits what it signifies for what it signifies” (tr. Kretzmann p.  107),[16]  and Walter Burley likewise: “supposition is simple when a common term or an aggregated singular term supposits for what it signifies” (tr. Spade p.  82),[17]  William of Ockham appears to characterize simple supposition quite differently: “Simple supposition occurs when a term supposits for an intention of the soul and is not functioning significatively” (tr. Loux p.  190).[18]  But in fact, the difference between them is not in their theories of supposition, but rather of signification. As we noted earlier, Ockham believes that a general term like ‘man’ signifies individual men like Plato and Socrates; Burley that it signifies a second substance (the universal), man. Burley appeals to the authority of Aristotle: “‘man’ is the name of a second substance; therefore, the term ‘man’ signifies a second substance. And it does not signify a second substance that is a genus. Therefore, it signifies a species” (tr. Spade p.  87).[19]  Ockham, however, dismissed real universals, and (at least in his later theory represented in Summa Logicae) believed the only universals were words, including words of the inner mental language, mental acts. So for him, a spoken or written term has simple supposition when it stands non-significatively for the mental act to which it is subordinated by the conventions of signification, that is, the mental act abstracted from those things which the word conventionally signifies. John Buridan (Summulae, tr. Klima, sec 4.3.2, p. 253) famously eliminated simple supposition altogether, for this very reason, namely, that universals are words of a mental language, so terms suppositing for them are suppositing for a kind of linguistic item, and so such a case should be included under material supposition. Material and simple supposition are contrasted with personal supposition, what we might call the standard case, where a term stands for ordinary objects – the objects it signifies (for Ockhamists) or for its supposita, as for example, Lambert (ed. Alessio, p. 209; tr. Maloney, p. 259) or Burley express it: “Supposition is personal when a term supposits for its suppositum or supposita or some singular of which the term is accidentally predicated” (tr. Spade p.  81).[20]  The contrast is a useful one, as is shown in the following standard fallacies: The premises are true and the conclusion false, so wherein lies the fallacy? It is one of equivocation or “four terms”: ‘homo’ (‘man’) has simple supposition in the first premise and personal supposition in the second, so there is no unambiguous middle term to unite the premises. Again: This time, ‘currens’ (‘running’) supposits differently in the two premises, materially in the first and personally in the second, explaining why putting the two truths together fallaciously leads to the false conclusion. In earlier times, these would have been called fallacies of univocation since what varies is the supposition, not the signification, of ‘man’ and  ‘running’.[21] What determines whether a term has material, simple or personal supposition? One view might be that it depends on the intention of the speaker; another, that all propositions are ambiguous. However, the prevailing medieval view was that it was determined by the predicate, so that, e.g., a predicate like ‘is a noun’ requires material supposition for the subject, while ‘is a species’ requires simple supposition: “A subject, on the other hand, sometimes supposits a form separately and sometimes does not, depending on what the predicate demands, in accordance with the following [principle]: Subjects are of such sorts as the predicates may have allowed” (Sherwood, tr. Kretzmann, p.  113).[22]  This slogan, talia subiecta qualia predicata permiserint (subjects are such as predicates permit), was commonly attributed to Boethius; but Sherwood correctly points out that Boethius' point was different, and his phrase was the converse: “talia [predicata] qualia subiecta permiserint” – see De Rijk, Logica Modernorum II (1), p. 561. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, it became commonplace to require a nota materialitatis (a sign of the material use) for a term in material supposition. Such a sign was to prefix ‘iste terminus’ (‘this term’) or ‘ly’ (taken from the French definite article) to the term. Without such an indication, the term was considered to have personal supposition by  default.[23]  The use of inverted commas is a much later innovation. Personal supposition is divided by most authors into discrete and common supposition, the first that of singular terms (proper names, demonstrative phrases and so on), the latter that of general terms. Common personal supposition is again divided, namely, into determinate and confused, and the latter into confused and distributive and merely confused supposition. These three modes are well illustrated by the four categorical forms (see the entry on the   Traditional Square of Opposition): (A) All A are B. (E) No A are B. (I) Some A are B. (O) Some A are not B. The subject of (I)- and (O)-, and the predicate of (I)-propositions, have determinate supposition; the subject and predicate of (E)-, the subject of (A)-, and the predicate of (O)-propositions have confused and distributive supposition; and the predicate of (A)-propositions has merely confused supposition. This is common doctrine; what varies is how these modes are characterised. “It is determinate”, writes William of Sherwood, “when the locution can be expounded by means of some single thing” (tr. Kretzmann, p. 108), but adds a doubt: “It seems that when I say ‘a man is running’ [i.e. an I-proposition] the term ‘man’ does not supposit determinately, since [A] the proposition is indefinite, and [B] it is uncertain for whom the term ‘man’ supposits. Therefore it supposits [A] indefinitely and [B] uncertainly; therefore indeterminately” (pp.  115–6).[24]  But this is simply a matter of terminology, he replies – determinate supposition means suppositing for one, not for many, but for no particular one, for that would constitute discrete supposition. Note, however, that for Ockham, Burley and others, a term with determinate supposition supposits for everything of which it can be truly predicated. The sense in which it is true of one, rather than many, is that the proposition is true if true of one. The term still supposits for all. As Burley says: “The supposition is called ‘determinate’, not because a term suppositing determinately in this way supposits for one suppositum and not for another. Rather the supposition is called ‘determinate' because for the truth of a proposition in which the common term supposits determinately it is required that the proposition be made true for some determinate suppositum” (tr. Spade pp.  102–3).[25] All that William of Sherwood can offer to characterize confused supposition is to say that it is had when a term supposits for many, then resorting to examples for its divisions. Peter of Spain tries harder: “Confused supposition is taking a common term in place of many by means of a universal sign” (tr. Copenhaver, p.  249),[26]  and confused and distributive when it supposits for all. But this is still unclear, and eventually a solution was found, in the doctrine of ascent and descent. Call the individual things falling under a general term its “inferiors”, and call the singular proposition resulting from a general proposition by replacing a general term (with its qualifier) by a term with discrete supposition for one of its inferiors, one of the proposition's “singulars”. Then the inference from a general proposition to one of its singulars is called “descent”, the converse inference, “ascent”. If descent under a term is valid, or at least is valid without changing the rest of the proposition, it is called “mobile”, otherwise “immobile”. Walter Burley, William of Ockham and their followers could then define the three modes of common personal supposition as follows: In this last case, 2 (ii), Ockham noted: “it is possible to descend by way of a proposition with a disjunctive predicate and it is possible to infer the original proposition from any [singular]” (tr. Loux p.  201).[27]  Thus the predicate of an A-proposition has merely confused supposition since descents 1 and 2 (i) are invalid, but from ‘Every man is an animal’ one can validly infer ‘Every man is this animal or that animal and so on for all animals’, and conversely, from ‘Every man is this animal’ (were it ever true) one could infer that every man was an animal. A final complication came at the end of the fourteenth century and subsequently, when it was asked: “Are there only three modes of common personal supposition?” Some answered, ‘Yes’; but others distinguished two modes of merely confused supposition, or equivalently distinguished a fourth case, 2 (iii), collective supposition, where descent was permissible to a proposition with a conjunctive term. The standard example was ‘All the apostles of God are 12’, which entails ‘Matthew and Mark and so on are 12’, with a conjunctive  subject.[28] Several recent commentators have asked what the medieval theory of modes of common personal supposition was for: was it a theory of inference, of quantification, of truth-conditions, of fallacies, or what? Asking these questions may help us to come to terms with the theory; but if pressed too hard, they are unhelpful. The medievals' theory was none of these things; it was their theoretical basis with which to pose and answer semantic questions. All modes of supposition so far described fall under what was variously called proper supposition or accidental supposition or, excluding material supposition, formal supposition. Distinct from these were what Peter of Spain called natural supposition, mentioned earlier in the discussion of signification, and what Ockham and others call improper supposition, covering metaphor and other figures of speech. Moreover, various authors before the fourteenth century, and at least one fourteenth century author too (namely, Vincent Ferrer) differed a little from what has been said in not attributing supposition to predicate terms, calling the corresponding property of predicates, “copulation”. However, even in the early thirteenth century, this distinction was fading. William of Sherwood makes it clearly: substantive names and pronouns supposit, whereas adjectives, participles and verbs copulate – all those terms which are attributed to something by means of the copula ‘is’. Only the modes of common personal supposition are repeated for copulation: “every copulating word signifies in adjunction to a substantive and thus is copulated personally … [and] every copulating word is the name of an accident, but every name of an accident is common; therefore no copulation is discrete” (Sherwood, tr. Kretzmann, p.  121).[29]  However, even in Lambert and Peter of Spain, there is only an empty nod towards copulation. Lambert notes that properly speaking, supposition attaches to substantives, while copulation is appropriate for adjectival terms. But broadly speaking, he says, supposition belongs to both (ed. Alessio, p. 208; tr. Maloney, p. 258). The distinction is clearly unnecessary and useless, and although the term is preserved in, e.g., Walter Burley's De Puritate, his discussion headed ‘On Copulation’ is in fact a discussion of the uses of the copula, ‘est’.