 William of Sherwood, writing from an Oxford perspective in the 1240s, identified four properties of terms: “There are four properties of terms that we intend to distinguish now … These properties are signification, supposition, copulation, and appellation” (tr. Kretzmann, p.  105).[1]  A different tradition is represented by Peter of Spain and Lambert of Auxerre, namely, that of Paris. Lambert identifies five properties of terms: “there are many properties of a term, namely, supposition, appellation, restriction, distribution, and relation … But, because signification is, as it were, the perfection of a term, and because the properties of a term are founded on signification, one ought for the sake of clarity in what follows to see at the outset what the signification of a term is and how it differs from supposition” (tr. Maloney, p.  253).[2]  In his treatment he includes ampliation (a correlative to restriction) and thereby matches the sections in Peter of Spain's Tractatus: De suppositionibus (On Suppositions), De relativis (On Anaphora), De ampliationibus (On Ampliations), De appellationibus (On Appellations), De restrictionibus (On Restrictions), De distributionibus (On Distribution). To these must be added further properties of terms which were important in the theory's gestation in the twelfth century but were later no longer included as distinct properties: univocation, equivocation, adjectivation, substantivation and so on. From the fourteenth century onwards, other properties were also abandoned, so that finally the important lasting properties were signification, supposition, ampliation and restriction, and relation (that is, the supposition of relatives, i.e., anaphora). Given the central importance which it later attained, it is surprising how late supposition was in being identified as one of the properties of terms. In the twelfth century, the primary distinction was that between signification, or univocation, and appellation. As early as Anselm's De Grammatico we find a distinction between significare per se (signify in itself) and significare per aliud (signify relatively). The latter was also known as appellare (to name or appellate). Whereas in the former (per se) what was signified was a form, in the latter what was signified, or appellated, was a thing. A single form is common to a number of things we call by the same name, so one crucial problem in the philosophy of language is to understand how the different uses of a name are unified in the face of the distinctness of the many individuals talked about. In this way, we can understand the importance in the twelfth century of univocation in contrast with appellation. Proper names, naming single items, are contrasted with appellative names, naming many. Univocation is the signification of a univocal word, described in the Fallacie Parvipontane as “retaining the signification of the name while varying its supposition/appellation” (my  translation).[3]  Thus a fallacy of univocation occurs when one does not realise that what is being talked about (the supposita or appellata) change. For example, to infer ‘A dodo lives’ from ‘A dodo lived’ is a fallacy (of univocation) since the former is false (there are no living dodos for ‘dodo’ to stand for) while the latter is true (for the past tense ampliates ‘dodo’ to stand for past dodos – see  section 4).[4] Throughout much of the twelfth century, ‘supposition’ retained the linguistic sense it had had since at least the time of Priscian (early 6th century CE), namely, the placing of a name as  subject.[5]  The relation of that name as subject to the thing named was called its appellation. This was the ability of a univocal appellative noun to name different things. The appellation of a name was not fixed, however. It could be ampliated or restricted by the predicate. So, for example, the predicate ‘opinabilis’ (credible) ampliates or extends the appellation of a name such as ‘man’ to cover a wider range, perhaps of no longer existing men, or of men who might have existed, or who might exist in the future. Thus, appellation came to mean the present correct application of a term (William of Sherwood, ed. Lohr et al., p. 265; tr. Kretzmann, p. 106), which could be ampliated, or even restricted by, say, the apposition of an adjective: ‘white man’ appellates only white men, not all even presently existing men. Later, however, ‘supposition’ came to replace ‘appellation’, and the latter term underwent its own transformation. Supposition became the leading property of an occurrence of a term in a proposition (including now predicates, and even parts of predicates), distinguishing what in particular was being spoken of on some occasion of utterance by some particular use of a word, from that word's general property of meaning (signification). The term ‘man’ signifies the form of man wherever the term occurs, but each occurrence of the term ‘man’ supposits for the individuals in possibly distinct classes or groups of men (note that it supposits for the men, not the classes). Given the literal meaning of ‘supponere’ as “acting as subject”, it is unsurprising that several authors, even as late as Vincent Ferrer in the 1370s, restricted supposition to subject terms, preferring to speak instead of copulation as the corresponding property of the predicate. Those reservations aside, however, the natural similarity in function of subject and predicate in picking out varying classes of things while remaining a univocal term, led most authors to extend the notion of supposition to all terms. At the same time, talk of univocation was superseded by signification, by implication univocal signification unless equivocation was  identified.[6]  Burley (2000, p. 80) says that “supposition properly so called is a property of a subject term relative to the predicate”. However, “supposition taken broadly is a property of a term relative to another in a proposition. In this sense, supposition belongs to the subject as well as to the predicate, and even to the verb.” A major shift in focus occurred in the early fourteenth century, probably occasioned by Ockham – certainly, he was the leading figure among the terminists, those who focussed “on terms as the basic unit of logical analysis” (Ashworth 2010, p. 146). On the one hand, signification came to be understood entirely extensionally, given Ockham's antipathy towards real universals. Accordingly, what was taken to be signified by a term were the things of which it can be truly predicated instead of a form or property which they share. For example, whereas hitherto the term ‘man’ had been taken to signify humanity, and ‘white’ whiteness, for Ockham the former signifies (all) men and the latter all white things. From this perspective, the contrast found in thirteenth century authors between (as Peter of Spain called it) natural supposition versus accidental supposition, becomes less important. Natural supposition was the term's natural or nomic extension, accidental supposition that range of things it supposited for in a particular proposition. For Peter, the term signifies a form, and supposits naturally for a class of objects, whereas an occurrence of the term supposits accidentally on an occasion of use for a group of those objects. For Ockham, the term signifies that class, the form being no more than a fictum (a figment of the mind) or (in his later works) the mental act (of conceiving of those things) itself. From the early fourteenth century, signification and supposition came to dominate among the properties. Ampliation and restriction were already functions of supposition (or appellation as it had been), copulation as the naming function of predication is subsumed under supposition, and relatio, the connection of anaphoric terms to their antecedents, becomes a discussion of the supposition of those terms. Finally, distribution is treated as a particular mode or type of supposition, confused and distributive supposition. Indeed, in the final phase, it could seriously be asked whether supposition was indeed a property of terms, as does Albert of Saxony (Quaestiones circa Logicam, q. 12). For like many others, following Peter of Spain (2014, p. 240), he defines supposition as ‘acceptio termini’ (the act of acceptance of a term) of various kinds, and so supposition is as much a property of the speaker or hearer as of the term.