 A revival of interest in imagery was an important component of the so called cognitive revolution in psychology during the 1960s  and early 1970s, a period when the Behaviorist intellectual hegemony  over the field was broken and the concept of mental  representation was established as central and vital to  psychological theorizing (Baars, 1986; Gardner, 1987; but see also  Leahey, 1992). The first (and formative) textbook of the emerging  cognitive approach to psychology (Neisser, 1967) devoted substantial  space to mental imagery, and the end of the 1960s brought the  publication of a spate of books reviewing and reporting new findings  on the psychology of imagery: Richardson (1969), Horowitz (1970),  Paivio (1971), Piaget & Inhelder (1971), Segal (1971a), Sheehan  (1972). Although the emergence of computational models of mental processes  probably played the leading role in the rise of cognitive psychology  and cognitive science, the new interest in imagery was independently  motivated, and contributed significantly to the growing feeling,  amongst psychologists, that both the ontology and methodology of  Behaviorism were excessively restrictive, and that inner mental  processes and representations could, after all, be useful, or even  indispensible, scientific concepts. Quite apart from the broader talk of revolution in psychology in this era (e.g., Hebb, 1960), there  seems to have been a real sense, at the time, that the revival of  interest in imagery was, in itself, an insurgent movement liberating  psychologists from entrenched but outworn Behaviorist dogmas. The  imagery revival was depicted in dramatic terms as “the return  of the ostracized” (Holt, 1964; cf. Haber, 1970), as “a  dimension of mind rediscovered” (Kessell, 1972), and as marking “a paradigm shift in psychology” (Neisser, 1972b). Holt (1964) indicates a number of developments that began to lead some  psychologists, in the 1950s, to begin to pay significant attention to imagery again. These include research on hallucinogenic drugs,  developments in electroencephalography, the discovery of REM sleep  and its correlation with dreaming, and Penfield's (1958) finding that direct electrical stimulation of certain brain areas can give rise to vivid memory (or pseudo-memory) imagery. More significant, however,  (according to Holt) was a line of psychological research that was  originally inspired by practical, rather than theoretical, concerns:  by the perceptual problems experienced by people such as radar  operators, long-distance truck drivers, and jet pilots, whose work  requires them to remain perceptually alert whilst watching  monotonous, impoverished, and barely changing visual stimuli over  extended periods of time. In the laboratory, subjects experiencing  such sensory deprivation often spontaneously reported vivid,  intrusive, and sometimes bizarre mental imagery, “like having a dream while awake” (Bexton, Heron, & Scott, 1954; but see Suedfeld & Coren, 1989). Despite  the introspective nature of the evidence, the practical implications  of these findings (for such things as road and air safety) made them  hard to dismiss. Beginning in the 1960s, and perhaps stimulated by some of the research mentioned by Holt, there was also a growing interest in the application of imagery based techniques in psychotherapy and psychosomatic medicine (see, e.g., Assagioli, 1965; Horowitz, 1970, 1983; Korn & Johnson, 1983; Sheikh, 2003). By the 1970s, something of a self conscious imagery movement had taken hold, in which discoveries and theoretical developments coming out of experimental psychology and cognitive science helped to fuel and legitimate an enthusiasm for the application of imagery to psychotherapy, and even to “personal growth,” “consciousness expansion,” and the like.  More recently, imagery based techniques, including, but not limited to, so called “mental practice” (Richardson, 1967; Ryan & Simons, 1982; Nordin et al., 2006), have come to be extensively applied in sports psychology, where they are widely believed to have the potential to boost athletic performance to a significant degree (Paivio, 1985; Sheikh & Korn, 1994; Driskell et al., 1994; Morris et al., 2005; Short et al., 2006; Weinberg, 2008).  A journal dedicated to the subject, the Journal of Imagery Research in Sport and Physical Activity commenced online publication in 2006.  Great claims are also made, by some, for the healing powers of guided imagery, whereby clients (or patients) are encouraged to visualize particular scenes or scenarios thought to have therapeutic value (e.g., Rossman, 2000). Guided imagery techniques have been claimed to be effective for purposes ranging from chronic pain relief and the preparation of patients for surgery (Fontaine, 2000; Tusek et al., 1997), to breast enlargement and global spiritual renewal (Willard, 1977; Ekstein, 2001)! It is sometimes claimed or implied that these sorts of techniques are based upon ancient oriental, and particularly Indian, spiritual  practices (e.g., Samuels & Samuels, 1975; Gawain, 1982), and it  thus may not be coincidental that a prominent figure in the  psychotherapeutic imagery movement is a Pakistani born psychologist,  Akhter Ahsen, known not only for his clinical and theoretical  work (e.g., Ahsen, 1965, 1977, 1984, 1985, 1993, 1999), but also  because he was instrumental, in the later 1970s, in the foundation of the International Imagery Association, and the peer reviewed Journal of Mental Imagery (which began publication in 1977). The Association's mission, stated on their web site, is “to  further the understanding of mental imagery and advance its potential in the development of human consciousness” (see   Other Internet Resources). The journal publishes articles on imagery from a wide range of psychological perspectives, including the cognitive. An American Association for the Study of Mental Imagery was also founded in 1978, with a mission to promote “the study of mental imagery as a part of human science and the application of scientific knowledge about mental imagery in the relief of human suffering and the enhancement of personal development”.  Its journal, Imagination, Cognition and Personality, commenced publication in the early 1980s. (The Association may now be defunct — its web site has disappeared — but the journal continues to be published.) Despite the developments outlined above, interest in imagery amongst  experimental psychologists remained at a fairly low level until the  mid to late 1960s. It was the recognition, in that period, of the  powerful mnemonic effects of imagery that changed the situation,  leading to a thriving tradition of experimental research, and  securing imagery a firm place in cognitive theory. These mnemonic  effects, it turned out, could be clearly demonstrated in readily  repeatable experiments that did not rely in any way upon  introspective reports. According to Bugelski (1977, 1984), an important stimulus to the  flowering of experimental research on imagery and   memory[23]  was the 1966 publication of Frances Yates' celebrated and widely read historical study, The Art of Memory. Yates details how  imagery based mnemonic techniques, particularly versions of the  so-called method of loci, were in widespread use amongst  European intellectuals, educators, and orators from classical Greek  through to early modern times, and she argues that the knowledge and  use of these techniques may have had quite significant effects on the development of Western philosophical, theological, and early  scientific thought. (see Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics). Around the same time, Soviet psychologist Alexander Luria's (1960,  1968) extensive case study of the “mnemonist”  Shereshevskii first became available in English, and well known  amongst English-speaking psychologists. Shereshevskii's truly  prodigious feats of memory were apparently made possible by an  abnormally vivid visual imagination, often harnessed to his own  version of the method of loci. Experiment soon confirmed  that the imagery method of loci, as described by Yates and  Luria, was extremely effective in enhancing memory performance in  ordinary people (Ross & Lawrence, 1968). Actually, a revival of scientific interest in imagery mnemonics seems to have been nascent in North America, even before Yates’ work appeared, or Luria’s was translated into English.  According to Hoffman & Senter (1978) the stimulus came from the tradition of “magic shows”, and, particularly, the performances of “memory men” (or sometimes “memory women”), who would use traditional mnemonic systems to perform impressive feats of memory for entertainment purposes. Some of these “memory men” (or people who had learned from them) also promoted mnemonic systems as useful in business, or wrote popularizing books that explained how to use mnemonic techniques, mostly imagery based. Books of this type by Lorayne (1957), Roth (1961), and, especially, Furst (1954, 1957) seem to have been amongst those that influenced psychologists to take in interest (Hoffman & Senter, 1978; Morris & Hampson, 1983).  According to Hoffman & Senter (1978) the first real scientific study of imagery mnemonics was carried out at the University of Pennsylvania in the late 1950s, by Wallace, Turner, & Perkins, who were attempting to explore “the limits of human information storage”. Turner had formerly worked as a stage magician and memory man, and suggested that the subjects be taught an imagery mnemonic technique to help them to realize the full potential of their memories. As a result, however, the experiment was deemed a failure; when the subjects used the mnemonic technique, there seemed to be no practicably measurable limits to their information-storage capacity! Because of this, the study was never published, but word of the findings does seem to have got out, particularly via Eugene Galanter, who had also been at the University of Pennsylvania at the time. The enormously influential book that he co-authored, Plans and the Structure of Behavior includes a brief account of the findings of Wallace, Turner, & Perkins, and of the imagery mnemonic they used (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960 pp. 136f). This book is considered one of the key, foundational works of the cognitive revolution in psychology, and was enormously influential in the field (although it is better known for its introduction of concepts from computing and Artificial Intelligence research into psychology, rather than for its account of imagery mnemonics) (Gardner, 1987; Hirst, 1988; Galanter, 1988; Neisser, 1988 p. 85). But, almost certainly, the most important figure in the study of the mnemonic effects of imagery was the Canadian psychologist Allan Paivio, whose interest in the subject seems to have originated quite independently of any of the influences mentioned so far, going right back to 1950, when he witnessed an impressive demonstration of the power of an imagery mnemonic, and was taught how to use it, as part of a course on public speaking that he attended (Paivio, 1991c, 2007 pp. 22-24; Marks, 1997). (The connection between imagery mnemonics and public speaking goes right back to their origins in ancient times: see  Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics.)  Despite this, perhaps because of the still generally iconophobic character of North American psychology through the 1950s (see  Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery),  his first publication to (very tentatively) suggest a role for imagery in memory did not appear until 1963 (Paivio, 1963). However, bolder claims and much further experimental work soon followed, and, by the end of the decade (by then, no doubt, abetted by awareness of the more eye-catching historical and anecdotal studies of Yates and Luria) Paivio’s theoretical speculations about the central role of imagery in memory, and painstaking quantitative experiments with which he supported them, were attracting a great deal of attention. By the later 1960s, and in the 1970s, many other psychologists had taken up research in this area, but Paivio was well established as the field’s leading figure, and discussion centered largely upon the implications and merits, or otherwise, of the Dual Coding (imagery code and verbal code) theory of mental representation that he proposed to explain his results (Paivio, 1971, 1986, 1991a, 1991b, 1995, 2007). Note, however, that, although they inevitably became entangled, the ensuing controversy between the Dual Coding and the rival Common Coding theories of memory (see  Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory)  should not be confused with the better known debate between analog (pictorial) and propositional (descriptive) theories of imagery (see  §4.4). The former debate is about the function of imagery in cognition, the latter is about the nature and mechanism of imagery itself. The findings of this extensive experimental research program on the  mnemonic effects of imagery, can be crudely summarized as the  discovery of two principal effects. First of all, it was  demonstrated quite incontrovertibly that subjects who follow explicit instructions to use simple imagery based mnemonic techniques to  memorize verbal material (typically lists of apparently random words, or word pairs) remember it very much better than subjects who do not  use such techniques (Bower, 1970, 1972; Bugelski, 1970; Paivio, 1971; Neisser & Kerr, 1973). Secondly, and somewhat more  controversially, Paivio and others claim to have shown that imagery  plays a large role in verbal memory even when the experimental  subjects are not given explicit instructions to form imagery, and  make no deliberate effort to do so. To demonstrate this, Paivio and  his associates initially determined quantitative imagery  values for each of a long list of nouns: that is to say, the  relative ease with which subjects could generate a mental image  appropriate to the word, or the likelihood that an image would  spontaneously be evoked by the word in question (Paivio, Yuille,  & Madigan,   1968).[24]  (On the whole, concrete nouns such as ‘cat’ have high  imagery values, and abstract nouns such as ‘truth’ have  low ones, although there are exceptions to this rule.) Once these  quantitative imagery values were established, Paivio was able to  show, in various experimental designs, that words with high imagery  values were consistently remembered significantly better than those  with lower ones, quite regardless of any conscious intent on the  subjects' part to form relevant images (Paivio, 1971, 1983,  1991a). Much controversy ensued, however, as to whether the “imagability” of the referents of the words in question is the truly causally relevant factor, or whether it is some other feature of the words (or their referents) that happens to be well correlated with this imagery value.[25] Further discussion of theories of the mnemonic properties of  imagery: Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory Supplement: Conceptual Issues in Dual Coding Theory By the end of the 1960s, the work of Paivio and others on the  mnemonic properties of imagery had established a strong empirical  case for the functional importance of imagery in cognition. The  phenomenon could no longer be ignored by psychologists, or treated as a mere subjective epiphenomenon of no scientific interest, as it had  been in the Behaviorist era. However, this work had done very little  to illuminate the nature of imagery itself, or of the cognitive  mechanisms that generate it. This began to change in the early 1970s when Roger Shepard and his students began to publish experimental demonstrations of the “mental rotation” of images (e.g., Shepard & Metzler, 1971; Shepard & Cooper et al., 1982). Soon after, Stephen Kosslyn and his collaborators produced experimental evidence for the “mental scanning” of visual images, showing that it took longer for subjects to consciously scan between image features that were relatively further apart than between those that appeared close together (Kosslyn, 1973, 1980; Kosslyn, Ball, & Reiser, 1978; Pinker & Kosslyn, 1978; Pinker, 1980; Finke & Pinker, 1982, 1983; Pinker, Choate, & Finke, 1984; Borst et al., 2006; Borst & Kosslyn, 2008). Kosslyn also demonstrated that the subjective sizes of visual mental  images (and the relative sizes of their sub-parts) measurably affect  the times it takes to inspect and report on particular details of  imagined objects. The presence of larger features of an object could  be reported more quickly (from an image of the object) than smaller  features. As this size-time relation, did not appear unless  the subjects used imagery to do the task (i.e., to confirm that some  named object type has some particular feature or sub-part), these  experiments provided further evidence for the notion that imagery is  a sui generis form of mental representation, with distinct  properties from linguistic or purely conceptual representations  (Kosslyn, 1975, 1976a, 1976b, 1980). Kosslyn and his associates also claim to have experimentally measured the “visual angle of the mind’s eye”, and to have mapped differences in acuity across the “visual field” of imagery, just as one can for the real visual field (Kosslyn, 1978a; Finke & Kosslyn, 1980; Finke & Kurtzman, 1981a,b; Farah et al., 1992). It should be noted that the methodology of many of these experiments leaves them vulnerable to the charge, pressed by several critics, that the results reflect not so much the normal workings of cognition, and the properties of the representational structures (such as mental images) that enable them, but, rather, what psychologists call the demand characteristics of the experimental situation (Orne, 1962; Rosnow, 2002)  (see supplement).   This is a well-known pitfall of psychological experimentation with human subjects, and experimenters are, for the most part, well aware of it, and take what precautions they can to rule out the possibility that demand characteristics might significantly influence their findings.  Nevertheless, certain types of imagery experiment, including most of those discussed in this section, appear to be particularly susceptible to such influence (Intons-Peterson, 1983), and it may sometimes be effectively impossible to rule out the possibility that demand characteristics have played a large, or even predominant, role in determining the results. Thus, some of the results obtained in this area of research remain open to question. This is particularly true of the claims to have mapped the “visual angle of the mind’s eye” and the “visual field” of imagery. The demand characteristics of these experiments, whose results are not supported by any other, converging, experimental evidence, seem particularly strong, and the work has thus been the target of particularly severe methodological criticism (Intons-Peterson & White, 1981; Banks, 1981; Thomas, 2014 p. 153). The work has been defended by Finke & Kurtzman (1981c; Finke, 1989 ch. 2), and the claims about “visual angle” continue to be presented as established fact by Kosslyn (1994; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006), but not everyone may be convinced. On the other hand, converging evidence from several different types of experiment seems to have been enough to establish a consensus amongst most cognitive scientists that the processes of mental scanning, mental rotation, and the size effects in image inspection are real and significant components of cognition. Shepard, Kosslyn, and others argued that these results show that visual mental imagery has inherently spatial properties, and represents in an “analog” fashion that is quite different from the way in which language and other symbolic systems represent (Shepard & Chipman, 1970; Shepard, 1975, 1978b, 1981; 1984; Kosslyn, 1975, 1980, 1981, 1983, 1994; Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, & Shwartz, 1979; Kosslyn, Thompson & Ganis, 2006). However, others, particularly among those who were strongly committed to a (digital) computational view of the mind, firmly rejected this conception of imagery (Simon, 1972; Anderson & Bower, 1973; Baylor, 1973; Moran, 1973; Pylyshyn, 1973, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2001, 2002a,b, 2003a,b,c, 2004, 2007; Hinton, 1979; Slezak, 1995). A lively and high-profile theoretical debate ensued, about the nature of mental imagery and of mental representation in general. Further discussion of experiments on the spatial properties  of imagery: Supplement: Mental Rotation Supplement: The Problem of Demand Characteristics in Imagery Experiments The analog-propositional debate, occasionally also called  the picture-description debate, or sometimes just the  imagery debate (as if there were no other debatable or hotly debated issues about imagery) is an ongoing and notoriously irreconcilable dispute within cognitive science about the representational format of visual mental imagery.  The huge impact it had on the early development of the field appears to have resulted in a widespread belief, amongst both philosophers and cognitive scientists, that analog and propositional theories (those terms being understood in the rather special senses that they have acquired in this context), together, perhaps, with hybrid theories that claim to incorporate elements of both (e.g., Tye, 1991; Chambers, 1993), completely exhaust the space of possible or empirically plausible scientific accounts of imagery (Thomas, 2002). That is not the case, as we shall see in section 4.5. To a first approximation, the analog side of the debate holds that the mental representations that we experience as imagery are, in some important sense, like pictures, with intrinsically spatial representational properties of the sort that pictures have (i.e., pictures do not just represent spatial relationships between the objects they depict, but represent those relationships, at least in part, via actual spatial relationships on the picture surface). The propositional side, by contrast, holds the relevant mental representations to be more like linguistic descriptions (of visual scenes), without inherently spatial properties of their own. Although it began as a dispute amongst scientists, the debate clearly touches on fundamental issues about the nature of mind and thought, and perhaps the nature of science too, so it soon attracted a good deal of interest from philosophers as well. It is good to be aware that the terms analog and  propositional, although they have become entrenched usage in this context, are both potentially misleading. On the one hand the  propositions which are supposed by some to constitute the  descriptions that constitute imagery, are not really propositions at  all in the established philosophical sense of the word: rather they  are a sort of sentence (albeit not sentences natural language, but of  mentalese).[26]  On the other hand, the “quasi-pictorial” theory of  Kosslyn (1980, 1983, 1994, 2005), which has become very much the  dominant theory on the other side of the debate, in fact models  mental images as digitized pictures generated within a  simulation program running on a digital computer (Kosslyn  & Shwartz, 1977; Kosslyn,   1980).[27] Although the debate began, and was at its fiercest, during the formative years of the discipline of cognitive science in the 1970s, it has yet to reach a generally accepted resolution. Despite Kosslyn's (1994) unilateral declaration of victory for the analog side, the controversy has flared up anew, and continues in the 21st century (Slezak, 1995, 2002; Thomas, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Pylyshyn, 2002a,b, 2003a,b,c, 2004; Kosslyn, Ganis & Thompson, 2003, 2004; Kosslyn, 2005; Grueter, 2006; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006; Dulin et al., 2008; Lewis et al., 2011). The Behavioral and Brain Sciences target article by Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, & Shwartz (1979), together with the appended commentaries, provides a good sense of the debate at its height, and many of the most important philosophically oriented contributions to its early stages can be found in two collections edited by Block (1981a,b).  However, it may be difficult to understand the scientific and philosophical issues at stake unless one has a sense of the historical and intellectual context in which the dispute originated. Matters became so hotly contested during the 1970s that some  participants, most notably Anderson (1978) and Palmer (1975b, 1978),  came to the conclusion that the disagreement was quite impossible to  resolve by the methods of scientific psychology, or perhaps at all.  Indeed, Anderson (1978) offered a formal proof purporting to show  that the two main contending theories are empirically equivalent.  Anderson's arguments in particular aroused much interest at the time, and were themselves vigorously disputed (Hayes-Roth, 1979; Pylyshyn,  1979b; Cohen, 1996) and defended (Anderson, 1979). However, the main  debate continued, and it is probably fair to say that most observers  have come to the conclusion that the empirical equivalence claimed by Anderson is ultimately not particularly interesting or important. It  can probably be regarded as just a special case of the well known  Duhem-Quine underdetermination of theory by evidence: many  philosophers of science hold that any theory can be made to  fit any evidence provided one is allowed freely to  supplement the theory with arbitrary (and perhaps ad hoc,  complex, and implausible) auxiliary hypotheses, which is essentially  what Anderson was doing. Nevertheless, the fact that such claims  could be seriously proposed and discussed is testament to just how  acrimonious and intractable this debate about imagery had come to  seem at the time, and how important it was to those involved. The  very possibility of a science of cognition seemed to be under threat. Despite this, the debate's focus has, in practice, been quite narrow. Although it is often understood to be a debate about the nature of imagery per se, it may more truly be seen as about what theory of imagery will best account for the facts within the parameters of a computational functionalist theory of the mind, i.e., a theory that holds that mental states in general are to be identified with states of the brain as individuated in terms of their computational/functional role in cognition. Although this computational functionalism still has many adherents, it no longer dominates the philosophy of mind and cognition to the extent that it once did. However, in the early 1970s it was new and exciting, and the computational approach to cognitive theory that it sanctioned was being taken up with great enthusiasm by many psychologists (Baars, 1986; Gardner, 1987). Both the cognitive psychologists and the functionalist philosophers drew much of their inspiration from Artificial Intelligence research in the "physical symbol systems" tradition of what Haugeland has called GOFAI (Good Old Fashioned AI) (Newell, 1981; Haugeland, 1985). Initially, the concurrent rises of imagery research and computational psychology, through the 1960s and into the 1970s, played mutually reinforcing roles within the cognitivist revolution against Behaviorism, because they both implied that the concept of mental representation should play a central role in the science of the mind. However, a tension soon became apparent between the symbolic and syntactic concept of mental representation that came from Artificial Intelligence and the, on the face of it, very different concept of representation implicit in the work of the imagery researchers. The analog-propositional debate, and much of the passion and partisanship it aroused, grew out of that tension, and, more particularly, the desire to bring imagery within the fold of computational functionalism. The analog-propositional debate may be said to have begun when this  tension found its first clear expression, in a very influential  article by Zenon Pylyshyn   (1973).[28]  Since then, Pylyshyn has continued to extend and defend his critique  of pictorial (or analog) theories of imagery in many subsequent  publications (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1978, 1981,1984, 2002a,b,2003a,b,  2005). Although a number of other cognitive scientists and  philosophers have taken positions, and made empirical and theoretical arguments, similar to and supportive of those of Pylyshyn (e.g.,  Anderson & Bower, 1973; Reed, 1974; Palmer, 1975a, 1977; Kieras,  1978; Hinton, 1979; Lang, 1979; Slezak, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1995,  2002), and others continue to reject picture theories for different  reasons (e.g., Neisser, 1979; Heil, 1982; White, 1990; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; O'Regan & Noë, 2001; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bennett & Hacker, 2003; Bartolomeo et al., 2013), Pylyshyn remains, indisputably, the best known and most influential critic of pictorial theories of imagery. Clearly Pylyshyn objects, as many philosophers have before him, to  the notion of inner mental pictures that are somehow called to mind  and reperceived by the “mind's eye”. In his 1973 article  he raised a number of objections to this notion, some of which have  withstood criticism better than others, but the underlying worry was  clearly that the inner-picture theory of imagery inevitably commits  the homunculus fallacy: it implicitly relies on the assumption that  there is a little man (or rather, something that is the functional  equivalent of a full-fledged visual system, including eyes), or, at  the very least, something with inexplicable mental powers,  inside the head to reperceive, experience, and interpret the image.  The broad functional architecture of Kosslyn's theory, in fact,  closely parallels that of Descartes' account of imagery (see   section 2.3.1, and  Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery),   and, of course, Descartes notoriously relied upon a conscious homunculus, the immaterial soul, that is placed forever beyond the reach of natural science. Modern defenders of the pictorial/analog theory protest that they cannot have committed the homunculus fallacy (let alone committed themselves to Cartesian dualism) because a computer model of the theory has been implemented, and they have outlined an account of how picture-like representations, formed at an early stage of visual processing in the brain, are subject to several more stages of neural processing before they give rise to visual knowledge and experience (Kosslyn, 1980, 1994; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2002, 2006). However, their critics remain unconvinced that they have truly even recognized this pitfall, let alone successfully avoided it (Slezak, 1993, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Pylyshyn, 2002a,b, 2003a,b,c, 2004, 2007). For instance, the computer simulation just mentioned (Kosslyn & Shwartz, 1977, 1978; see also Kosslyn, Flynn, et al., 1990) can do without a homunculus only because the role of the homunculus is filled for it by the full-sized humans who program and operate the computer, and who see, and so consciously experience, the “images” that it outputs to its VDU screen. What the program actually does is construct and display a picture on the computer's screen, on the basis of a stored file, and then move it about on the screen in various ways, in order to model some of the ways in which people can supposedly manipulate their mental images (such as in mental rotation and mental scanning). These “images” are conscious only if, and inasmuch as, a conscious person sees then on the screen. (The pictures, of which only two examples were actually programmed into the system, were, in fact, quite crude “ASCII art”: for an example of one of the pictures, and a more detailed account of the program and its capabilities, see Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems, particularly figure 2 and its accompanying explanation.) At the time when the program was written, when computer graphics were in their infancy, and when few people had ever even seen a computer, it may not have been an entirely unimpressive achievement. However, nothing in the program (nor, so far as I am aware, in any computer simulation of a pictorial theory of imagery written since) implements, or even attempts in any way to simulate or model, a conscious awareness of the pictures. Kosslyn & Shwartz (1977) mention that they hope, one day, to add a “mind’s eye” function to their simulation, to “look at” the image within the computer, as it were, but, unsurprisingly (given how difficult an AI problem naturalistic computer vision turned out to be (Brooks, 1992, 1999)), this was never done. Arguably, given their assumptions about the essentially passive nature of the earliest stages of vision, it never could be (Thomas, 2009, 2014 §5). As consciousness, nothing in the Kosslyn & Shwartz simulation even pretends to correspond to a grasp of what it is that the pictures that it produces represent (or even that they are supposed to be representations). Only the human onlooker consciously experiences the pictures, knows that they are pictures, and can tell what they might be pictures of (Thomas, 2009). If quasi-pictorial theory were capable of accounting for the representational and conscious nature of imagery without appealing to a homunculus, then the Kosslyn-Shwartz program might constitute a heuristically useful (if crude and preliminary) model of how images might be built up and transformed. However, despite vehement claims to the contrary (e.g., Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 p. 41), the existence of the program in no way shows that the theory can avoid making the appeal to a homunculus. In a subsequent paper, Pylyshyn (1978) introduced an important new argument against pictorialism, based on the concepts (which he introduced) of cognitive penetrability and impenetrability. The distinction between cognitively impenetrable and cognitively penetrable processes closely parallels Fodor's later distinction between modularized and unmodularized, “central” cognitive systems (Fodor, 1983).  Cognitive processes are said to be cognitively penetrable if their workings can be affected by the beliefs and goals of the person, and cognitively impenetrable if they cannot be. Pylyshyn argues (and Fodor (1983) concurs) that there are good reasons to believe that “early” visual processing, i.e., the processes by which visual inputs give rise to beliefs about our surroundings, is cognitively impenetrable. For example, he points out that well known visual illusions, such as the Ponzo and Müller-Lyer illusions, continue to deceive us even when we know perfectly well that they are illusions (figure 4.4.1_1). The two horizontal lines in both the Ponzo and the Müller-Lyer figures continue to look as though they are of different lengths even when we  have measured them and are quite convinced that they are, in fact,  the same.  Figure 4.4.1_1 The Ponzo Illusion (left) and  the Müller-Lyer Illusion (right).  In both cases, the two  horizontal lines are the same length, but appear to be different  lengths. As Pylyshyn sees it, the view that he rejects, the view that visual  mental imagery involves a representational format that is peculiarly  visual and is distinct from the format in which beliefs and  propositional attitudes in general are represented, amounts to the  claim that images are generated within this cognitively impenetrable, “early visual processing” module. If that were the case,  imagery should be a cognitively impenetrable phenomenon, but it is   not.[29]  The way we experience our mental imagery is clearly affected by our  beliefs and goals. Not only do we have a large degree of voluntary  control over the content of our imagery experiences, but it has also  been experimentally demonstrated that extra-visual beliefs can  influence the course of supposed imagery processes. For example, the  times taken to “mentally scan” between different  landmarks on a mental image of a map (see section 4.3 above) are  affected not only by the actual relative distances between the points on the map, but also by information that is verbally given about  those distances. Subjects tend to take longer to “mentally  scan” over a distance marked as representing 80 miles than over a distance marked as 20 miles, even though the actual distances  depicted on the map (which they have learned and are supposedly  imagining) are the same (Richman, Mitchell, & Reznick, 1979a,b;  see also Mitchell & Richman, 1980; Goldston et al.,  1985; Reed, Hock & Lockhead, 1983). Pylyshyn's views about the cognitive impenetrability of “early  vision”, the relevance of this to our understanding of imagery, and the concept of cognitive penetrability/impenetrability itself,  all remain controversial (see, for example, the commentaries  published with Pylyshyn (1999)), but he has continued to develop and  refine the concept (which also has applications outside the imagery  debate), as well as the associated argument, over many years (e.g.,  Pylyshyn, 1984, 1999, 2002a, 2002b, 2003b). Pylyshyn also argues (1981, 2002a) that most if not all of the  experimental evidence that is supposed to show that imagery has  inherently spatial properties (such as Kosslyn's work on mental  scanning (Kosslyn, Ball, & Reiser, 1978; Kosslyn, 1980)) can be  explained away as the result of the interaction of the experimental  subject's tacit knowledge of the properties of visual  experience and the experimental instructions. For instance, he holds  that if subjects are asked to scan their mental gaze from one point to another on a mental image of a map, what they interpret these  instructions to be asking them to do is to behave as if they were  actually looking at the relevant map and scanning their gaze between  the points. Because they know from their history of ordinary visual  experience that it takes longer to scan between points that are  further apart, this will be reflected in their performance. Thus, the fact that people instructed to scan across their images take longer  to scan longer distances is not evidence of the existence of some  inner, mental, image-space. Rather, it is a reflection of people's  implicit understanding (which they may not necessarily always be able to articulate) of the visual properties of the actual space around  them (cf, Morgan, 1979). Pylyshyn's critics have often been inclined to conflate his tacit knowledge theory with the view that the results of imagery  experiments may be fatally contaminated by the effects of  experimental demand characteristics (see  supplement).   However, although he clearly does think experimental demand plays a large role in determining many of the results on imagery, he resists this interpretation of his position. He is not saying (as is sometimes implied) that experimental subjects are, as it were, consciously faking their performances in order to please the experimenter. Rather they are doing their best to comply with experimental instructions that turn upon the slippery concept of mental imagery. The fact that the subjects and the experimenter may share similar assumptions about the causes of quasi-visual experience (the “folk theory” of images as inner pictures), so that both interpret the experiment in terms of operations on inner pictures in an inner space, is not evidence that those assumptions are correct. It is generally assumed that problems caused by demand characteristics can be avoided or minimized by careful and ingenious experimental design, or by such tactics as post-experimental questioning of subjects to see if they have guessed the experimental hypothesis (Kosslyn, for one, routinely throws out data from subjects who guess this correctly). However, Pylyshyn is not saying that what might otherwise be meaningful experimental results are “contaminated” by the effects of demand characteristics, so such “decontamination” tactics are not very relevant. Rather, the problem lies with the basic conceptualization of the phenomena and the experimental tasks (by experimenter and subject alike). Of course, Pylyshyn was far from the first person to raise objections to the idea of inner pictures, or to criticize the standard  interpretations of imagery experiments. What made his critique  particularly effective was that he began, both in his 1973 article  and in subsequent writings (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1978, 1981, 1984, 2003b), to sketch out an alternative, non-pictorial account of the nature of  mental imagery. Instead of being like pictorial representations of a  visual scene, he suggested, images might better be thought of as  being a sort of description (sometimes referred to as a  “structural description”) of that scene. At last, there seemed to be a viable alternative to the pictorial conception of imagery that had dominated folk, philosophical, and psychological thinking about imagery since  ancient   times.[30]  Philosophers such as Shorter (1952) and Dennett (1969) (who both base their position on the oft repeated, but almost certainly unsound, argument from image indeterminacy, or “tiger's stripes” argument) had anticipated Pylyshyn in suggesting that mental images might be more like descriptions than  pictures.[31]   However, Pylyshyn was able to make the idea much more concrete and plausible by linking it with concepts of the nature of mental representation that were emerging from Artificial Intelligence research.  Particularly important for Pylyshyn was the work of Simon (1972) and Newell (1972), and their students Baylor (1973) and Moran (1973), who had already made some progress in devising symbol systems suitable for the computational representation of the spatial structure of simple layouts or objects (such as rectangular blocks). They explicitly presented these representations as models of the image representations that people use in doing certain visuo-spatial cognitive  tasks.[32]  By presenting these ideas as the germ of an alternative to the venerable but highly problematic conception of images as inner pictures, Pylyshyn was able to make a powerful case. In his original (1973) article, Pylyshyn alludes to a number of  disparate schemes developed by various computer scientists, for the  computational representation of visual information, and it is perhaps not altogether clear what these have in common as alternatives to a  pictorial conception of imagery. This was very much clarified,  however, when Fodor (1975) introduced the hypothesis of  mentalese, the “language of thought” (see   Language of Thought Hypothesis),  a syntactically structured representational system innate to the  human brain, which Fodor argued, was, in some form, implicitly  required by all coherent computational functionalist theories of  cognition. The vocabulary and syntax of mentalese (if it exists)  remain unknown, but they are likely to be very different from those  of English or any other natural (actually spoken) language.  Nevertheless, Fodor holds that any cognitive theory capable of  accounting for the full range of human mental capacities is bound to  make appeal to some such inner language. Pylyshyn has embraced this  hypothesis (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988), and, in the light of that,  we can say that his view of the nature of imagery is that it consists of descriptions, in mentalese, of visual objects or scenes. (This  means, of course, that Pylyshyn's positive view of imagery –  description theory – is viable only if the controversial  language of thought hypothesis is true. However, many of  Pylyshyn's objections to pictorial theories of imagery might still  stand even if this were not the case.) Fodor did not, however, embrace Pylyshyn's objections to  pictorial mental imagery. Although he holds that pictorial  representations are not sufficient to support cognition on  their own, and are probably dependent on associated mentalese  representations for playing any cognitive roles that they do play, he nevertheless argues against some philosophical objections to mental   pictures,[33]  and thinks that the empirical evidence (from psychologists such as  Paivio and Shepard) suggests that images do in fact play a real role  in our cognitive processes (Fodor, 1975 pp.174–194). It is sometimes objected that a description theory, like Pylyshyn's,  is incompatible with the phenomenology of imagery (e.g., Fodor, 1975  p. 188). After all, having a mental image of a cat does not seem  anything like reciting a description of a cat to oneself. However,  this seems to be based on having drawn too close an analogy between  the mentalese descriptions intended by the theory and descriptions in English (or other natural languages). In the first place, although we can be conscious of English sentences as such, we are (pretty much  ex hypothesis) never conscious of our mentalese  representations as such, but only (at most) of what they represent.  Thus there is no reason to expect that entertaining a mentalese  description would subjectively seem anything at all like reciting, or reading, or otherwise thinking of a description in English. In the  second place, Pylyshyn presumably holds (quite consistently with mainstream  “information processing” theories of perception (e.g.,  Marr, 1982)) that percepts, the end products of visual processing in  the brain, are also mentalese descriptions. Thus his theory readily  accounts for the phenomenological similarity between imagery and  perceptual experience. (If, as seems likely, the perceptual  descriptions are typically more detailed than those of imagery, this  might also account for any phenomenological  differences between imagery and perception.) This introspectively based argument against description theory, weak though it is, is often prelude to the even stronger claim that the phenomenology of imagery directly supports the view that mental images are inner pictures. After all, it is said, in contrast to reciting a description to oneself, having a mental image of (say) a cat does seem very much like seeing a picture of a cat. Although some people seem to find this argument tempting (e.g., Sterelny, 1986; Lewis et al., 2011), it does not stand up to much examination (Block,1983a; Tye, 1991; Thompson, 2007). There is little or nothing to the alleged similarity between the experience of having a mental image of a cat and that of seeing a picture of a cat, apart from the fact that both these experiences in some ways resemble the experience of actually seeing a cat, and both differ from it in that no cat need actually be present. Pictures and mental images also differ in important ways. It is generally possible, for instance, to turn over a picture and look at its blank backside, to examine its surface for marks (such as scratches or dirt) that do not have a depictive role, or to look at its flat surface from an oblique angle so that what it depicts appears distorted. You cannot do such things with a mental image. (You can of course, imagine looking at a picture in those ways, but then you are not turning over your mental image in your mind, or looking at its surface, rather, you are forming an image of a picture being turned over, of the back of the picture, or an image of a picture’s surface as seen in a certain way.)  It is true that pictures (paintings, drawings, photographs, videos, etc.) provide a familiar and relatively well understood example of how we can have an experience as of seeing something that is not actually present. Indeed, pictures (and sculptures) may be our only familiar example of this, apart from mental imagery itself. However, it does not follow that mental images must therefore be a species of picture. The easy analogy may be a false one. Mental images, after all, are not similar to pictures in many other respects: you cannot turn them over and look at the back of them; they do not need to be in front of your eyes for you to see them; they do not normally seem to be located on a surface; and there is little reason to think that they are normally flat (and, indeed, good reason, experimental as well as introspective, to think otherwise (Shepard & Metzler, 1971; Pinker & Kosslyn, 1978; Pinker, 1980; Pinker & Finke,1980; Kerr, 1987)). In fact, neither Paivio nor Shepard, who were undoubtedly the best  known imagery researchers at the time Pylyshyn published his initial  (1973) critique, were committed to the straightforward picture theory of imagery that he seemed to be criticizing. Paivio, in response to  Pylyshyn, quite explicitly rejected the picture metaphor (and related ones, such as the photograph and the wax impression), and suggested,  instead, that imagery is “a dynamic process more like  active perception than a passive recorder of  experience” (Paivio,   1977).[34]  (Unfortunately, however, that is about as explicit as he ever gets  about his positive view of the nature of imagery.) Shepard, although  he continued to write about the “analog” nature of image  representations, and to insist on the “second order  isomorphism” between objects and the brain processes that  constitute mental images of them (Shepard, 1975, 1978b, 1981, 1984),  was also very wary of the picture metaphor, suggesting instead that  imagery was related to perceptual anticipation or readiness to  recognize (Shepard, 1978b; cf. Cooper, 1976). Two other important early critics of Pylyshyn's position were Ulric  Neisser and Ronald Finke. Neisser developed the notion of imagery as  perceptual readiness or anticipation into a theory of imagery  explicitly opposed to both the picture and description theories  (Neisser, 1976, 1978a, b; 1979 – see section 4.5 below).  Finke's experimental work on visual illusions and aftereffects  induced by imagery (Finke, 1979, 1989 ch. 2; Finke & Schmidt,  1977, 1978) suggested that Pylyshyn was wrong to argue that imagery  does not make use of the “cognitively impenetrable”  mechanisms of “early” visual   processing,[35]  and he argued that there is evidence for functional equivalences  between imagery and perception (i.e., shared mechanisms) at multiple  levels or stages of perceptual processing (Finke, 1980, 1985, 1986,  1989). Neither Paivio nor Shepard, nor, indeed, Neisser, shared the  assumptions of the computational functionalist framework from within  which Pylyshyn was arguing: Paivio developed a metatheoretical  framework that remained rooted in Behaviorist empiricism, and which  he called “neomentalism” or “behavioral  mentalism” (1975c, 1986); Shepard speculated about the neural  basis of imagery in a style reminiscent of the speculative  neuroscience of Gestalt field   theory[36]  (Shepard, 1981, 1984); and Neisser aligned himself with the  ecological psychology of J.J. Gibson (1966,   1979).[37]  In this regard, Pylyshyn was much more in step than they were with  the direction in which cognitive science was going at the time.  However, Stephen Kosslyn soon intervened in the debate, proposing a  theory of visual imagery that was both explicitly computational and  overtly pictorialist (or, as he prefers, quasi-pictorial),  based on an analogy with computer graphics programs (which were a  fairly new thing back then) (Kosslyn,   1975).[38]  Before long, a flood of theoretical and empirical publications from  Kosslyn and his collaborators, including several books (Kosslyn,  1980, 1983, 1994; Kosslyn & Koenig, 1992), had established him as clearly the pre-eminent figure of the debate, alongside Pylyshyn. As  the leading figures on each side were now both firmly wedded to the  theoretical framework of computational   functionalism,[39]  the debate's scope was, in practice, greatly narrowed by this  development, even as its intensity and contentiousness (and  notoriety) grew. It developed not into an open ended inquiry into the nature and causes of imagery, but a manichean struggle between the  computational pictorialism championed by Kosslyn and his supporters,  and the computational description theory still most ably and  enthusiastically represented by Pylyshyn. In what remains one of the most effective critiques of Pylyshyn's position, Kosslyn & Pomerantz (1977; see also Kosslyn, 1980 ch. 1), besides going point-by-point through Pylyshyn's original (1973) arguments, and answering many of them very persuasively, go on to compare how a description theory and a quasi-pictorial theory like that proposed by Kosslyn (1975) might respectively explain various alleged “imagery effects” such as mental rotation, selective interference, and the mental scanning and size/inspection time effects discovered by Kosslyn himself. (It ought to be noted, however, that this discussion largely depends on the speculative ascription of straw-man accounts of these, at the time newly discovered, effects to Pylyshyn, or to description theorists in general. In fact, Pylyshyn’s actual, subsequently published, account of mental scanning, for example (Pylyshyn, 1981, 2002a), does not resemble the straw-man set up by Kosslyn & Pomerantz in the least; neither, so far as I am aware, has any other theorist ever seriously defended anything remotely resembling it. Despite this, Kosslyn has continued to set up and knock down this same straw-man, as a centerpiece of his critique of “propositional theory”, in subsequent writings (e.g., Kosslyn, 1994 pp. 8 & 12; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 p. 28)). The general conclusion reached by Kosslyn & Pomerantz was that description (propositional) theories could only explain these effects by making ad hoc auxiliary assumptions about how the propositional (mentalese) code is organized and processed, whereas the explanations of quasi-pictorial theory flow naturally from the core theory itself.  Indeed, they pointed out, it was pictorial conceptions of imagery, not “propositional” ones, that had suggested to psychologists that these effects might exist, and that it would be worthwhile devising experiments to confirm them. Pictorial theories had shown themselves to be scientifically fruitful in a way that description theories had not. On the face of things, description theory predicts that imagery  should depend upon the mechanisms and brain structures that subserve  conceptual, non-imaginal thought, and not those that subserve  perception. Indeed, one of Pylyshyn's favorite arguments against  pictorial images turns on his view that perception (but not imagery)  depends upon a “cognitively impenetrable,” highly  modularized cognitive system (see  section 4.4.1).   Thus it can be (and has been) argued that it is difficult, or at the least very awkward, for the description theorist to account for a wealth of empirical findings from neuroscience research that indicate that there is a good deal of overlap between the neural structures and cognitive mechanisms involved in imagery and those involved in perception (Kosslyn, 1994, 2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006; Kosslyn & Thompson, 2003; Bartolomeo, 2002; Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001; Kreiman, Koch, & Freid, 2000; Bisiach & Berti, 1990; Farah, 1988). Although a strong case can be made that (despite superficial appearances) these neuroscientific findings do not provide strong evidence in favor of the quasi-pictorial (or any other pictorial) theory of imagery (Thomas, 1999b; Abell & Currie, 1999; Pylyshyn, 2002a,b, 2003a,b; Bartolomeo, 2002), it does not follow that description theory can readily assimilate them. (Incidentally, although it was once widely believed that visual  imagery in humans was primarily a function of the right  hemisphere of the brain (e.g., Ley, 1983), more recent research  contradicts this. It now appears that imagery involves structures on  both sides of the brain, with, if anything, the left  hemisphere playing a slightly more extensive role (Ehrlichman &  Barrett, 1983; Farah, 1984, 1995; Sergent, 1990; Tippett, 1992;  Trojano & Grossi, 1994; Loverock & Modigliani, 1995;  Michimata, 1997).) As well as having continued to duel with Pylyshyn and other critics, Kosslyn has continued to develop his quasi-pictorial theory of imagery, initially as a computational model (Kosslyn & Shwartz, 1977, 1978; Kosslyn, Pinker, Smith, & Shwartz, 1979: Kosslyn, 1980, 1981), and latterly as a neurological one (Kosslyn, 1988, 1994, 2005; Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006). He calls the theory quasi-pictorial, to avoid the implication that he thinks  images are pictures in too literal and implausible a sense.  Quasi-pictures are not the sort of thing that can be hung on a wall  (Kosslyn, 1978b), and you do not need actual eyes inside the head  looking at them in order to experience them. Nevertheless, they  remain like pictures in many important respects. It remains  controversial whether there can be a coherent notion of a  quasi-picture that both retains the explanatorily useful properties of true pictures (such as their inherent spatiality, and their capacity  to cause visual experiences as of what they represent) and, at the  same time, lacks those properties that make it impossible for true  pictures to be mental, or even neural, representations (such as  needing to be illuminated and before our eyes in order to be  experienced). It is clearly Pylyshyn's opinion that there is no such notion, and  that much of the superficial plausibility of quasi-pictorial theory  depends upon an equivocation between the relatively well understood  concept of a picture in the everyday sense, and the essentially  non-pictorial notion of an array data structure (Pylyshyn, 1981,  2002a, 2003b). The literal picture in the head theory appeals to our  folk-theoretical intuitions, makes interesting predictions, and has  the resources to be genuinely explanatory, but it is demonstrably  false. On the other hand, the data-structure theory (to which  quasi-pictorialists retreat when literal pictorialism is challenged)  is really just a version of Pylyshyn's own description theory, and,  properly understood, has none of the special intuitive, explanatory,  or predictive advantages that picture theorists claim for their  views. Any apparent similarity between pictures and two-dimensional  array data structures is, according to Pylyshyn, no more than an  artifact of the way we customarily present such arrays on paper (or  screen) for the benefit of human eyes. It has nothing to do with  their actual mathematical properties, or with how they might function in cognition. Despite Pylyshyn's criticisms, however, many philosophers have  clearly been impressed by Kosslyn's work. Some have directly defended the quasi-pictorial theory of imagery, attempting to clarify the  notion of a quasi-picture, and to show that it has real content (von  Eckardt, 1984, 1988, 1993; Tye, 1988, 1991; Cohen, 1996). Others are  more circumspect, or less committed to the specifics of Kosslyn's  theory, but are now persuaded to countenance the possibility of  picture-like mental representations of some sort (e.g. Sober, 1976;  Block, 1981a, 1981b, 1983a, 1983b; Bower, 1984; Sterelny, 1986;  Rollins, 1989, 2001; Mortensen, 1989; Dennett, 1991; Brann, 1991).  Yet others, however, for reasons discussed in the previous section  (and the following supplement), remain entirely unpersuaded (e.g.,  Heil, 1982, 1998; White, 1990; Slezak, 1993, 1995, 2002; Thomas,  1997a, 1999b, 2002, 2003, 2009; Bennett & Hacker, 2003). Further discussion of the analog-propositional debate: Reading most of the recent philosophical literature on imagery (and,  it must be admitted, most of the broader cognitive science  literature, especially textbooks) one might easily form the  impression that quasi-pictures and "propositional"  descriptions are the only possible theoretical models for imagery,  or, at least, the only ones ever seriously proposed or considered.  This is not the case, however.The analog-propositional debate arose,  and was at its height, in the 1970s, when cognitive theories based  upon symbolic computation seemed to many to be “the only game  in town” in cognitive science (Fodor, 1975; Haugeland, 1978),  and the quasi-pictorial and propositional models are both products of this mileu. Even in the 70s, however, a number of alternative,  non-computational accounts of imagery were being put forward. On the  one hand, Taylor (1973) and Skinner (1974) looked for ways to  assimilate imagery into Behaviorism. On the other, several cognitive  psychologists suggested versions of what may be called  enactive (or sensorimotor, or perceptual   activity)[40]  imagery theories (Hochberg, 1968; Hebb, 1968, 1969; Gibson, 1970,  1979; Juhasz 1969, 1972; Sarbin & Juhasz, 1970; Sarbin, 1972;  Neisser, 1976, 1978a,   b).[41]  Although this work had little impact at the time, more recently,  spurred by related developments in perceptual theory, there has been  some revival of interest in theories of this type. Enactive theories of imagery may be seen as modern successors to the  motor theories of the early twentieth century (see   Supplement: The American Response: Behaviorist Iconophobia and Motor Theories of Imagery). They depend the idea that perception is not mere passive receptivity (or even receptivity plus inner processing), but a form of action, something done by the organism (Thomas 1999b, 2014 §5; O’Regan & Noë, 2001; Findlay & Gilchrist, 2003; Noë 2004, 2009; Land & Tatler, 2009; O’Regan, 2011). The perceiving organism is not merely registering but exploring and asking questions of its environment (Ellis, 1995), actively and intentionally (though not necessarily with conscious volition) seeking out the answers in the sensory stimuli that surround it.[42] Imagery is then experienced when someone persists in acting out the seeking of some particular information even though they cannot reasonably expect it to be there. We have imagery of, say, a cat, when we go through (some of) the motions of looking at something and determining that it is a cat, even though there is no cat (and perhaps nothing relevant at all) there to be seen. Visually imagining a cat is seeing nothing-in-particular as a cat (Thomas, 1999b, 2003, 2009; cf. Ishiguro, 1967). Farley (1974, 1976) developed a computer simulation inspired by  Hochberg's version of enactive theory, and Hampson & Morris  (1978, 1979; Morris & Hampson, 1983) discussed and critiqued  Neisser's version (which was undoubtedly the most detailed). However, with those exceptions, in the 1970s and 80s the enactive approach to  imagery attracted very little attention. It was not just that these  non-computational theories seemed irrelevant to psychologists and  philosophers whose focus was on integrating imagery into the  prevalent (symbolic, GOFAI (Haugeland, 1985)) computational model of  the mind. More specifically, the enactive theories do not fit  comfortably, if at all, into the framework of computational  information processing theory that shaped most scientists'  thinking about perception and perceptual experience. Information  processing theories come in many varieties, but they all, broadly  speaking, depict the sense organs as passive transducers of stimulus  energies (light, sound, etc.), whose outputs are then computationally processed and enriched, in the brain, into meaningful mental  representations (Lindsay & Norman, 1972; Haber, 1974; Frisby,  1979; Marr, 1982; Pylyshyn,   2003b; Boothe, 2002).[43]  Kosslyn's quasi-pictorial theory and Pylyshyn's description theory of imagery were both designed to fit this framework. They differ merely  in that Kosslyn holds that the representations comprising imagery are formed at an early stage of visual processing, whereas Pylyshyn holds that they are formed at a late stage. This difference, however, gave  rise to the impassioned analog-propositional debate, whose sound and  fury only served to further distract attention from theoretical  alternatives that did not fit the information processing   paradigm.[44] But it is well known that GOFAI style symbolic computationalism did  not remain the “only game in town” in cognitive science  for long. Since the mid 1980s its hegemony has been repeatedly  challenged, first by connectionism (e.g., Rumelhart, McClelland et  al., 1986; Clarke, 1989), then by various versions of situated or  embodied approaches to cognition (e.g., Varela et al., 1991; Smith, 1991; Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997), by dynamical systems theory (e.g., Freeman & Skarda, 1990; Port & van Gelder, 1995; van  Gelder, 1995; Garson, 1996), and by cognitive neuroscience (e.g.,  Kosslyn & Koenig, 1992; Gazzaniga, 2004). Connectionism did not challenge the information processing view of perception, however, and thus proved of little significance for imagery theory, inspiring little more than a handful of variants of quasi-pictorial array theory (Julstrom & Baron, 1985; Mel, 1986, 1990; Stucki & Pollack, 1992). The robotic system Murphy, designed by Mel (1990), has some interesting features in that it combines such a connectionist model of visual imagery with a model of trial-and-error learning of motor control, wherein information in the putative image is used to control the reaching behavior of a robotic arm (although it is not obvious that imagery, as distinct from visual perception, plays any such role in human reaching). Grush (2004) adopts this model as the basis of his own account of visual mental imagery, within the wider context of his “emulation” theory of cognition. Nevertheless, Mel and Grush continue to conceive of the image itself as being a two dimensional array of elements, just as the quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn does, and, indeed, in support of their models both Mel and Grush follow Kosslyn in appealing to evidence about the spatial properties of imagery and about the involvement of visual areas of the brain in imagery. Thus, despite the fact that Mel and Grush situate their accounts of imagery in the context of motor control rather than of visual cognition, they remain quasi-pictorial accounts, and are, in most respects, considerably less developed than (though perhaps consistent with) the version of quasi-pictorial theory developed by Kosslyn. As such, they share most of the virtues of Kosslyn's version, and are subject to the same objections (see supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery, and its Problems). Dynamical systems theory has also had relatively little to say about imagery, although Freeman (1983) has sketched an account of olfactory imagery in terms of neural dynamics. He explicitly distances himself from both sides of the analog-propositional debate, and makes appeal instead to the concept of search image as used in the science of Behavioral Ecology. A search image is (to a first approximation) a specific, learned recognitional capacity, or a form of selective attention, that leads a predator species to recognize and preferentially prey upon members of the more abundant prey species in its environment, whilst largely failing to notice less abundant types of potential prey (Tinbergen, 1960; Atema et al., 1980; Lawrence & Allen, 1983; Langley, 1996; Blough, 2002). However, it is less than clear that Freeman is justified in conflating this concept of search image with that of mental image, as used in folk psychology and cognitive science. It is mainly the rise of situated and embodied approaches to cognition that has challenged the information processing approach to perception, and enabled the re-emergence and further development of enactive imagery theory. During the 1980s, robotics researchers interested in creating robots to operate in real wold environments were finding that getting a machine to process information from sensory transducers into an internal representation of its surroundings that would provide a suitable basis for action planning was a very difficult computational problem. Indeed, some became convinced that, even if it could be done in principle, in practice the process would be unacceptably slow, unreliable, and computationally expensive (by the time the robot knew what was going on, things would have changed). Thus, there was a turn toward “active” (or “animate”) techniques in robotic perception. Instead of attempting to build up detailed internal representations of their environment, robots began to be designed to deploy their sensors purposively, to actively seek out just the specific information needed at that particular moment for making an impending behavioral decision (e.g., Bajcsy, 1988; Ballard, 1991; Blake & Yuille, 1992; Aloimonos, 1993; Swain & Stricker, 1993; Nolfi & Marocco, 2002; Lungarella & Sporns, 2006; Suzuki & Floreano, 2008; Rasolzadeh et al., 2010; Seekircher et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2011; Aydemir et al., 2013). At around the same time, a number of neuroscientists, perceptual psychologists, and philosophers began, for diverse reasons, to converge on a similar view of human vision (Ramachandran, 1990; O'Regan, 1992; Churchland et al., 1994; Akins, 1996; Cotterill, 1997; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; Hayhoe, 2000; O'Regan & Noë, 2001; Noë, 2002, 2004, 2009). Studies of (amongst other things) exploratory perceptual behaviors such as eye movements (Yarbus, 1967; Noton & Stark, 1971a,b; Landy et al., 1996; Hayhoe & Ballard, 2005), and recently recognized perceptual effects such as change blindness (Grimes, 1996; Simons & Levin, 1997; O'Regan, 2003) and inattentional blindness (Neisser & Becklen, 1975; Mack & Rock, 1998, 1999; Simons & Chabris, 1999; Eitam et al., 2013; Hyman et al., 2014), cast doubt on the traditional idea that a rich and detailed inner representation of the visual scene mediates our visual consciousness.  Instead, some now argue that perception depends on a multitude of special purpose neural and behavioral structures and/or routines (Ullman, 1984; Ramachandran, 1990; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; Roelfsema et al., 2000; Hayhoe, 2000; Roelfsema, 2005), each of which actively utilizes the sensory transducers (eyes, ears, etc.) in a different way in order to obtain specific types of information as and when needed. We do not have our sense of the immediate perceptual presence of the world because we have a representation of it in our heads, but rather because these routines operate (for the most part) so quickly and effortlessly that virtually as soon as we want to know some perceptually available fact, we are able to discover it.[45] Although this way of thinking about perception remains a minority view, and certainly does not dominate perceptual theory in the way that information processing theory once did, it has nevertheless created a theoretical space in which an enactive/motor theory of imagery can be more plausibly entertained, and various versions of such theory have indeed been broached again, by thinkers from a diverse range of disciplines (Thomas, 1987, 1997b, 1999b, 2009, 2014; Newton, 1993, 1996; Ellis, 1995; Ramachandran & Hirstein, 1997 p. 442; Marks, 1990, 1999; Bartolomeo, 2002; Bartolomeo & Chokron, 2002; Blain, 2006; Sima, 2011, 2013, 2014; Sima & Freksa, 2012; De Preester, 2012; Agnati et al., 2013; Troscianko, 2010, 2013, 2014a,b; Bartolomeo et al., 2013).  Thomas (1999b) argues that enactive theory can explain experimental cognitive psychology's findings about imagery (see sections 4.2 and 4.3 above) at least as well as the better-known quasi-pictorial and propositional/description theories, and, indeed, that it handles the facts about imagery in the blind and image reconstrual (see  Supplement: The Quasi-Pictorial Theory of Imagery)  in a more principled and plausible way than they do. It has also been argued that enactive theory can provide a more satisfactory explanation of the neurological evidence about imagery (i.e., the ways imagery experience and abilities may be impacted by various forms of brain damage), and, in particular, the syndrome of representational neglect (see  Supplement: Representational Neglect)  than other theories can (Bartolomeo, 2002; Bartolomeo & Chokron, 2002; Dulin et al., 2008). Other relevant evidence comes from studies of eye movements during imagery. Saccades are quick, mostly unconscious, flicks of the eyes, which are now known to play an important role not only in vision, but in visual imagery as well. In normal human vision they occur, on average, three or more times every second (Richardson & Spivey, 2004; Holmqvist et al., 2011), and play a vital role in our visual system's exploration of the visual world, and the extraction of information from it. The pattern of our saccadic movements is purposeful, under cognitive control, and depends both on what we are looking at, and on what visual information we hope to obtain, on the purpose behind our looking (Yarbus, 1967; Noton & Stark, 1971a,b; Stark & Ellis, 1981; Findlay & Gilchrist, 2003; Hayhoe & Ballard, 2005; Rucci et al., 2007; Rothkopf et al., 2007; Martinez-Conde & Macknik, 2007; Trommershäuser et al., 2009). Although the scientific study of saccades began well over a century ago, in recent years technological advances in eye-tracking technology have led to a rapid growth in understanding and appreciation of the large role that they play in human vision (Richardson & Spivey, 2004; Wade & Tatler, 2005; Holmqvist et al., 2011; Thomas, 2014 §5). It has also become apparent that saccades (and perhaps other types of eye movement too) play a significant role in visual mental imagery. Numerous recent experimental studies have shown that, when people hold a visual image in mind, they spontaneously and unconsciously make saccadic eye movements that (at least partially) enact the stimulus-specific pattern of such movements that they would make if actually looking at the equivalent visual stimulus (Brandt & Stark, 1997; Demarais & Cohen, 1998; Spivey et al., 2000; Spivey & Geng, 2001; Gbadamosi & Zangemeister, 2001; Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002; de’Sperati, 2003; Johansson et al., 2005, 2006, 2010, 2012; Humphrey & Underwood, 2008; Holšánová, 2010; Holšánová et al., 2010; Sima et al., 2010; Bourlon et al., 2011; Fourtassi et al., 2011, 2013; Johansson, 2013; Johansson & Johansson, 2014; Laeng et al., 2014; see also Clark, 1916; Jacobson, 1932; Totten, 1935; Altmann, 2004; Martarelli & Mast, 2011). Furthermore, imagery is disrupted (to a greater or lesser degree) if someone who is holding an image in their mind either restrains themselves (to the limited degree that this is possible) from making eye movements, or else deliberately moves their eyes in an image-irrelevant way, thus disrupting the spontaneous saccadic pattern (Antrobus et al., 1964; Singer & Antrobus, 1965; Sharpley et al., 1996; Andrade et al., 1997; Ruggieri, 1999; van den Hout et al., 2001, 2011; Kavanagh et al., 2001; Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002; Barrowcliff et al., 2004; Postle et al., 2006; Kemps & Tiggemann, 2007; Maxfield et al., 2008; Lee & Drummond, 2008; Gunter & Bodner, 2008; Lilley et al., 2009; Jonikaitis et al., 2009; Engelhard et al., 2010, 2011; Laeng et al., 2014). This issue has been much researched lately, not so much because of its significance for our understanding of imagery, but because of its possible relevance to the understanding of the psychotherapeutic technique known as EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing), which is widely used in the treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), and which may perhaps owe its effectiveness largely to the fact that deliberate eye movements tend to disrupt any concurrent imagery. In EMDR treatment, patients are induced to deliberately move their eyes back and forth whilst visually recalling the events that have traumatized them; it is claimed that this leads to a significant reduction in the vividness of their memories of those events, and of the distress, and consequent symptoms, that those memories cause (Shapiro, 1989a, 1989b, 2001; Shapiro & Forrest, 1997; Mollon, 2005). Studies of therapeutic outcomes seem to bear out claims for EMDR’s effectiveness (Carlson et al., 1998; Van Etten & Taylor, 1998; Shepherd et al., 2000; Power et al., 2002; Ironson et al., 2002; Bradley et al., 2005; APA, 2006; Bisson et al., 2007; Högberg et al., 2007, 2008; van der Kolk et al., 2007; Rodenburg et al., 2009; Kemp et al., 2010). Although the mechanisms and real therapeutic effectiveness of EMDR remain controversial (for negative opinions, see: Lohr et al., 1998, 1999; McNally, 1999; Herbert et al., 2000; Davidson & Parker, 2001; Taylor et al., 2003; Justman, 2011; – for defenses and more positive assessments see: Perkins & Rouanzoin, 2002; Schubert & Lee, 2009; Gunter & Bodner, 2009; Cukor et al., 2010), the disruptive effect of deliberate eye movement upon visual imagery appears to be well established, and it implies that the eye movements that spontaneously occur when people visualize things (or, at the least, the brain processes that initiate and control these movements) are not mere accompaniments or epiphenomena of the imagery, but are (as enactive theory would lead one to expect) a true, functionally significant part of the physiological process that embodies  it.[46] (However, Mast & Kosslyn (2002b) argue that the eye-movement evidence can also be accommodated to quasi-pictorial  theory.[47]) Kosslyn, Thompson, Sukel, & Alpert (2005; see also Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 pp. 90–92) report an experiment in which subjects were asked to recall mental images of simple geometrical arrangements while PET scans of their brains were taken. Although all subjects formed images of the same figures, some originally formed them on the basis of verbal descriptions, whereas others were shown separate segments of the entire structure to be visualized, and asked to assemble them mentally into the complete figure. The PET scan was not taken at the time the images were originally formed in one or other of these ways, but when they were later recalled. According to the experimenters, enactive theory holds that when someone recalls a mental image they re-enact what they did at the time of its original formation, and since the two subject groups originally formed their images in very different ways, the theory predicts that the two groups should display radically different patterns of brain activation at the time of recall.  In fact, however, no marked differences were seen. This is claimed to constitute a refutation of the enactive theory. It rests, however, on a demonstrable misunderstanding of the theory. No version of enactive imagery theory holds (either explicitly or implicitly) what these experimenters claim it holds: that recall of mental imagery is constituted by re-enactment of whatever was the original act of image formation. What enactive theory in fact holds is that imagery (recalled or otherwise) is constituted by (partial) enactment of the perceptual acts that would be carried out if one were actually perceiving whatever is being imagined (Johansson et al., 2010, 2012; Laeng et al., 2014). It is true that in the most straightforward and paradigmatic case of mental image formation – the direct recall of an earlier perceptual experience of something – enactment of what one would be doing if actually perceiving that thing is equivalent to re-enactment of what one did during the original perceptual episode. However, this equivalence clearly breaks down in most other circumstances, including those of the experiment in question.  Since both groups of subjects in the experiment under discussion were supposed to be recalling an image of the same geometrical pattern when their brains were scanned, enactive theory actually predicts that the neural activity due to the recalled image should be much the same in each group, just as was found. Quite apart from empirical evidence, certain distinctively philosophical advantages have been claimed for enactive theory. It has been suggested that it is better able than its rivals to explain imaginal consciousness (Ellis, 1995; Thomas, 1999b, 2001, 2009; Bartolomeo, 2002), and Thomas (1987, 1997a, 1999b, 2014) argues that enactive theory can provide the basis for an understanding of the concept of imagination, whereas quasi-pictorial theory and description theory cannot (see also: Blain, 2006; Agnati et al., 2013; Thomas,  2014).[48]  Troscianko (2010, 2013, 2014a,b) appears to agree, and, rejecting picture theory, uses the enactive theory of imagery as a framework for her investigation into how literary texts can imaginatively affect their readers. Traditionally, both philosophers and the folk have thought of the imagination as a mental faculty responsible both for mental imagery, and for the most admired forms of artistic (and other)  creativity.[49]  Unfortunately, neither picture nor description theories of imagery seem capable of providing a satisfactory account of how one mental faculty could be responsible for both these things (which may go some way toward explaining why many recent philosophers doubt whether there is any such faculty[50]). However, Thomas (1997a; 1999b, 2014) argues that enactive theory depicts both imagery and creative thinking as manifestations of the more basic imaginative capacity of intentionalistic perception (or “seeing as”). Implicit in the argument is the notion that certain types of creative insights should be associated with changes in the ways that relevant perceptions are enacted; experimental findings by Thomas & Lleras (2007, 2009; Thomas, 2011) (no relation) lend this idea some support. It has also been suggested (Newton, 1993, 1996; Thomas, 1999b, 2003, 2009;  see also Heil, 1998 ch. 6) that, because it regards imagery not as a  form of representational inscription (whether pictorial or  descriptive), but as a form of action, enactive theory may  be able to account for the intentionality of imagery without making  appeal either to the controversial   language of thought hypothesis,  or to the widely discredited (see   section 3.3)  resemblance theory of   representation.[51] However, if mental images are (as just about everybody believes) a  species of mental representation, these latter claims are at odds  with the idea that mental representations are token identical to  brain states. The majority of cognitive scientists (and sympathetic  philosophers) remain firmly committed to that idea, and perhaps it is largely for that reason that enactive theory remains a minority  viewpoint. Certainly it has yet to receive anything like the amount  of attention (either supportive or critical) that experimenters and  theorists have devoted to quasi-pictorial and description theories. Further discussion: The analog-propositional debate and the enactive theory of imagery concern  themselves primarily  with the nature and underlying mechanisms of the phenomenon, and have thus had relatively little direct impact on views about the function of imagery in cognition. In fact, both of the best known cognitive theories of imagery, the quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn (1980, 1994, 2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006) (especially as philosophically glossed by Tye (1991)), and the description theory of Pylyshyn (1973, 1978, 2003b), portray imagery as embedded within and dependent upon a more fundamental, language-like mental representational system, mentalese, from which it derives much or all of its semantic content. Thus neither of these theories did much to challenge the post-Wittgensteinian consensus (see  section 3.3)  that continues to give imagery, at most, a minor, auxiliary role in  cognition, with most of the burden being carried by either natural  language or the more basic and more flexible representations of  the hypothetical mentalese. Some neuroscientists and psychologists have been little moved by this consensus. Damasio (1994), for example, takes it for granted that  mental representations are imagistic; Bisiach & Berti (1990) and  Edelman (1992) argue that mentalese (but not image) representations  are neuroscientifically implausible; and Paivio (e.g., 1971, 1986, 2007;  Paivio & Begg, 1981; Sadoski & Paivio, 2001) elaborates a  comprehensive theory of cognition entirely in terms of image and  natural language representations, and holds that that the  representational power of language derives from that of imagery (see   Supplement: Dual Coding and Common Coding Theories of Memory).  However, as these authors did rather little to address the arguments  that have led most contemporary philosophers to think that imagery  cannot be representationally basic, their views (in this  regard) have had relatively little impact on philosophy. However, more recently those arguments have been challenged  by philosophers such as Lowe (1995, 1996, 2005), Nyíri (2001), and Ellis (1995). Ellis outlines a theory of how the meaningfulness  of language may be grounded in imagery that appears to meet at least  some of the stock objections (see   section 3.3,  and Thomas, 1997b). The arguments are also addressed, at least in  part, by Barsalou and his collaborators, who have proposed a theory  of what they call “perceptual symbol systems” as an  alternative to the language-like, “amodal”  (mentalese) symbol systems of traditional cognitive science  (Barsalou, 1993, 1999; Barsalou & Prinz, 1997; Barsalou et  al., 2003; Kan et al., 2003). Although Barsalou denies  that the perceptual symbols of his theory can be  straightforwardly equated with mental images (mainly because he holds that they may sometimes be active in cognitive processes without our  being conscious of   them)[52]  he clearly conceives of them in a way very close to traditional  conceptions of imagery, and certainly as being the immediate causes  of our imagery experience when we actually do have it. Barsalou holds that the neural basis of his perceptual symbols is a neural “simulation” of the brain processes that would be involved in the actual perception of whatever it is that is being symbolized. Others, such as Currie (1995; Currie & Ravenscroft, 1997; Abell & Currie, 1999) and Hesslow (2002), have also suggested that imagery is best understood as a simulation of perception. However, quasi-pictorial, enactive, and probably even propositional/descriptional theories of imagery can all reasonably be classed as simulative theories in the relevant sense (see Nichols et al., 1996), so it is not clear that this suggestion advances our understanding of the nature of imagery very  much.[53]   In any case, Barsalou's main interest is not in the nature of  imagery, but in how perceptual symbols might function in cognition to do the jobs that others have thought can only be done by a more  language-like system of representations, such as representing logical relations and propositions (as opposed to just representing  things). His detailed suggestions about these questions have aroused much interest. Perhaps inspired by Barsalou's work, Prinz (2002; see also Gallese & Lakoff, 2005) has recently made a detailed defense of something very like the traditional Empiricist theory of concepts (usually, although not invariably, interpreted as the view that concepts are images (see section  2.3.3)).  Like Barsalou (and, indeed, Locke), he does not take any strong  position as to the inherent nature of images or perceptual  symbols (and thus avoids embroiling himself in the  analog-propositional debate and its aftermath). Instead, he confines himself to trying  to show that it is plausible that our fundamental concepts are  perceptual in their genesis and character, a view that he is quite  happy to acknowledge is very close to the traditional imagery theory  of cognition. Prinz deals ingeniously with many of the standard  philosophical objections to theories of this sort, and he sidesteps  what has been the main philosophical objection to image theories of  concepts by avoiding committing himself to the resemblance theory of  representation (see   section 3.3  above). Instead, he suggests that his account of perceptual  representations can be combined with a version of the causal (or  covariation) theory of intentional content developed by Fodor (1990,  1994), Dretske (1995, 2000), and   others.[54]  However, it remains open to question whether such a causal theory can work (Cummins, 1997; Horst, 1996, 1999). Gauker (2011), by contrast, aligns himself more closely with the mainstream of twentieth century philosophy (see  section 3.3) in arguing that concepts (or ideas) cannot be identified with, or directly derived from, images, and are dependent upon a shared language, rather than being prior to it. Nevertheless, he holds that mental imagery plays a crucial role in human cognition and its development, because it forms the basis of a non-conceptual type of thought (unfortunately, as he admits (Gauker, 2011 p. 145f.), one that is scarcely acknowledged by contemporary psychological science) that not only plays a continuing role in human thinking, but also makes the learning of a first language by infants, and the continuing use of language, and thus the development and use of true concepts, possible. This enables him to avoid extravagant hypotheses, such as the positing of an innate, conceptual, and semantically rich, but introspectively inaccessible, language of thought, that other philosophers, such as Fodor (1975) have held to be necessary components of any adequate theory of language and learning and understanding (although, of course, some might consider Gauker’s conception of non-conceptual but instrumentally powerful imagistic thought to be an extravagant or ill-founded hypothesis in its own right). Other recent work has sought to explore the relationship, or lack thereof, between current conceptions of mental imagery and the more resonant, but more nebulous, notion of imagination (and related, or putatively related phenomena or concepts such as dreams, hallucinations, insight, and creativity) (White, 1990; Brann, 1991; Finke et al., 1992; Thomas, 1997a,b, 1999a,b, 2006, 2014; Kind, 2001; McGinn, 2004; Blain, 2006). Perhaps the most ambitious claims in this regard are those of Arp (2005, 2008), who comes at the matter from the controversial perspective of evolutionary psychology. Arp suggests that an innate, evolved capacity for what he calls scenario visualization (which is perhaps a similar notion the “imagistic thinking” championed by Gauker) is unique to the human species, and is the crucial factor that has made our high-level creative problem-solving abilities possible. From this perspective, it is in large part thanks to our capacity to form and manipulate mental imagery that humankind has been able to out-compete rival species, and develop our complex cultures and technologies.