 It seems likely that mental imagery has been discussed for as long as humans have been trying to understand their own cognitive processes. It receives attention in the oldest extended writings about cognition that have come down to us – the works of Plato and Aristotle – and there is reason to believe it was discussed by yet earlier Greek thinkers. Plato's and particularly Aristotle's writings have undoubtedly had an enormous and continuing influence on how cognition in general and imagery in particular are conceptualized within both the Western and the Muslim cultural traditions. However, there is reason to think that the phenomenon of imagery, if not this tradition of theorizing about it, is not culture bound.  Children as young as three have been found to be aware their imagery, and of its subjective nature (Estes, 1994), and researchers have been able to gather introspective reports and descriptions of mental imagery from members of non-Western cultures ranging from pre-literate tribal Africa (Doob, 1972) to modern Japan (where, indeed, the empirical psychological study of imagery seems to have been taken up with some enthusiasm – Oyama & Ichikawa, 1990). Imagery is also said to play a significant role in traditional Hindu and Buddhist spiritual practices (Samuels & Samuels, 1972; Ricard, 2006), and apparent references to the phenomenon of imagery can be found in the works of classical Chinese thinkers such as Confucius (e.g. Analects 9:10 &   15:5).[3]  There might well be important insights to be gleaned from the study  of these various cultures' conceptions of imagery, but the available  literature on this is very sparse (but see Ricard, 2006, and the discussion that is printed following it). Thus, of necessity, what follows  will focus on the Western philosophical and scientific tradition. In  any case, the seeds of the controversies about imagery that erupted  in the 20th century were sown not in Africa or the Orient, but in Greece. The following supplements discuss Greek conceptions of  imagery prior to the work of Aristotle: Supplement: Ancient Imagery Mnemonics Supplement: Plato and his Predecessors Where Plato regarded images as irremediably deceptive, Aristotle,  although he certainly recognized their potential for leading us  astray (De Anima 428a-b), saw them as playing an essential  and central role in human cognition, one closely akin to that played  by the more generic notion of mental representation in  contemporary cognitive science. Indeed, he developed what amounts to  the first comprehensive cognitive theory, a theory that has been  enormously influential over the subsequent ages, and continues  (mostly indirectly) to shape much scientific and philosophical  thought about the mind even today. He was clearly aware of, and very  possibly influenced by, the mnemonic imagery techniques in use in  Greece   (see supplement),  to which he alludes in at least four passages in his extant writings  (Topica 163b28, De Anima 427b18, De  Memoria 452a12–16, De Insomniis 458b20–22). Aristotle's Greek word, that is commonly and traditionally translated as "[mental] image" is “phantasma”  (plural: phantasmata), a term used by Plato to refer to  reflections in mirrors or pools (or the liver), amongst other things, but which Aristotle seems to reserve to appearances in the psyche.  Aristotle describes phantasmata as being analogous to  paintings or wax impressions (De Memoria  450a-b), and as  “a residue of the actual [sense] impression” (De  Insomniis  461b; cf. Rhetorica 137a 28) or “a  movement resulting from an actual exercise of a power of sense” (De Anima  429a 1–3). Some modern scholars, it should be  noted, have questioned the translation of  "phantasma" as "image," in part because  Aristotle does not always seem to think of phantasmata as  inner pictures, and also because he seems to think of them as playing a role in perception itself (Nussbaum, 1978; Schofield, 1978;  Birondo, 2001). As Hume distinguished impressions from  ideas, contemporary colloquial English distinguishes between percepts and the mental images that we experience  when we fantasize, daydream, or recall some experience from memory.  Aristotle's concept of phantasma seems to collapse this distinction. It has thus been suggested that  "phantasma" would be better translated as  "appearance" (Lycos, 1964) or "presentation"  (Beare, 1906) rather than as "image". However, contemporary scientific theories of imagery (see sections  4.4 and 4.5)  also, for the most part, do not make a sharp distinction in kind between  mental images and percepts, and are virtually unanimous in holding  (as, indeed, did Hume) that both are varieties of a single species. In any case, it is abundantly clear that, in many even if not all cases, Aristotle uses "phantasma" to refer to what we now call a mental image. Phantasmata have several functions paralleling those ascribed to imagery by modern folk psychology (and some scientific psychology). In particular, they are central to Aristotle's theory of memory (De Memoria et Reminiscentia; see Sorabji, 1972) and to his theory of thought. Not only does remembering essentially involve the recall of imagery of past experiences, but, he tells us, "It is impossible to think without an image [phantasma]," (De Memoria 450a 1; cf. De Anima  431a 15–20 & 432a 8–12). Phantasmata also play a key role in his account of desire and motivation (e.g. De Anima  431a — see Nussbaum, 1978): When some desirable object is not actually present to our senses, exerting its pull on us directly, our motivation to strive to obtain it is driven by our awareness of its (memory or fantasy) image. (This idea is still found in modern, scientific theories of desire (McMahon 1973; Kavanagh et al., 2005; Andrade et al., 2009).) Aristotle also apparently held that linguistic meaning derives from imagery, spoken words being but the symbols of the inner images (De Interpretatione 16a 5–9; De Anima  420b 29–32; see Modrak, 2001). Today, few theorists of language take this notion seriously (but see Paivio, 1986, 2007; Prinz, 2002), but it was almost universally accepted until relatively recent times (Wollock, 1997; and see  section 3.3 below). Very arguably, Aristotle's views about imagery (phantasmata) cannot be fully understood in isolation from his views about  imagination (phantasia), which he defined as “(apart  from any metaphorical sense of the word) the process by which we say  that an image [phantasma] is presented to us” (De  Anima  428a 1–4). Aristotle has been accredited with the very  invention of the concept of imagination (Schofield, 1978), and  certainly it seems fair to say that the roots of most subsequent  discussions of the concept can be traced back to his work (even  though, for him, it did not have the strong association with  creativity and aesthetic insight that it has since acquired, mostly  through the influence of the Romantic movement) (Watson, 1988; White, 1990; Thomas, 1999a). Unfortunately, however, Aristotle's remarks  about phantasia, suggestive and influential though they are, are scattered widely amongst the surviving texts, and the only  extended discussion of the concept (in De Anima  III.3) is  particularly difficult to interpret, not only because the text that  has come down to us seems to be more than usually corrupt (Nussbaum,  1992), but also because of the richness and density of its arguments  and its peculiarly oblique approach to the ostensible subject matter. After over two millennia of discussion, scholars still do not agree  about crucial aspects of Aristotle's conception of  phantasia, and thus about his view of the fundamental nature of   imagery.[4] Further discussion of the aftermath and influence of Aristotle's work on  imagery: It can hardly be denied that the concept of the idea was  central to much of modern philosophy. Ideas were mental  representations, and very frequently, though not necessarily always,  they were (explicitly or implicitly) conceived of as mental images.  Even if some authors did not themselves take ideas to be  images, it is likely that many of their readers would have taken them to be doing so. Thus, claims about the nature of ideas, and the  cognitive and epistemological roles they could or could not play,  were often conditioned by whether or not a philosopher did  conceive of ideas as images, and by what imagery was taken to be. The Oxford English Dictionary records a clear example of the word 'idea' being used in the sense of mental image as far  back as 1589, but philosophical confusion over whether or not ideas  are images goes back at least to the “father of Modern  Philosophy,” Descartes. Certainly the “clear and distinct ideas” that play such a prominent role in the  Meditations (1641), and in Descartes' epistemology more  generally, are not conceived to be mental images. We are  told that we can attain clear and distinct ideas of such things as  God and the human mind (Meditation 4, 53). Neither of these are things of which we have perceptual, let alone  quasi-perceptual, experience. But Descartes insists that even our  ideas of perceptible things are, inasmuch as they are clear and  distinct, not perceptual or imaginative. His perceptual and  imaginative grasp of the nature of a piece of wax, he tells us, can  never match the clarity and distinctness of the idea of the wax that  can potentially be attained by purely mental scrutiny (Meditation 2, 31). However, we also find in Descartes' work another conception of  idea as something that is quasi-perceptual (and,  indeed, pictorial) and is formed in the imagination. These  ideas may not be capable of providing the sure epistemological  foundation that Descartes thinks the clear and distinct ideas of the  intellect can give us, but they are real nonetheless, and probably  play a larger role in ordinary, non-philosophic thinking. Although  they are alluded to in many of Descartes works, these imagistic ideas are explained most fully in the Treatise of Man, where he  propounds his speculative physiological theory of visual perception  in some   detail.[5]  The nervous system is described as working by a form of hydraulics,  with the nerve fibres (including those that make up the brain)  functioning as hollow pipes carrying a fluid called animal   spirit.[6]  In the center of the brain is the pine-cone-shaped pineal gland,  slight movements of which, Descartes believed, were somehow able  directly to affect, and be affected by, the thoughts of the  immaterial soul. Figure 2.3.1_1, taken from the Treatise,  shows his model of visual perception: As a result of the formation of optical images on the retinae of the eyes, the nerves produce another image, isomorphic to the retinal   image[7]  (but re-inverted, so as to be upright), that is picked out on the  surface of the gland by the flow of animal spirits through its   pores.[8]  Thus points a, b, and  c on the surface of the gland correspond to points  A, B, and C of the arrow which is being observed. The tracing of the image on its  surface causes the gland to move in a subtle and complex  fashion that (in some unexplained way) causes a conscious visual  experience of the arrow in the soul (Descartes 1664 – see  particularly pp. 83ff. in Hall's translation).  Figure 2.3.1_1 Diagram from Descartes'  Treatise of Man (1664), showing the formation of inverted  retinal images in the eyes, and the transmission of these images, via the nerves so as to form a single, re-inverted image (an  idea) on the surface of the pineal gland. At the same time that the flow of animal spirits is causing visual  experiences by moving the pineal, elsewhere in the brain it is  causing visual memories to be laid down by its action upon the nerve  fibres themselves. These changes to hydraulic structure of the brain  allow for mental images of memory and imagination to arise by the  recreation of formerly experienced flow patterns of spirits at the  pineal surface. Descartes explicitly tells us that the surface of the pineal gland is the “seat of imagination   [l'imagination]”[9]  and that the images traced there are “ideas”  [idées] (Descartes 1664 – p. 86 in Hall's  translation; see also Descartes 1648 – p. 27 in Cottingham's  translation). At least one of Descartes' followers, de la Forge, suggested  that the term “idée [idea]” should be  applied only to concepts in the intellect, and coined the expression  “espèces corporelles [corporeal species]” to refer to the pictorial images of the imagination (Clarke, 1989).  However, this was clearly not Descartes' own practice. Indeed, in the Third Meditation we are told that, strictly speaking, the  word 'idea' should only be applied to thoughts that “are as it  were the images of things” (Meditation 3, 37). On the  other hand, in his letter to Mersenne of July 1641 he seems to say  just the opposite: ideas are in our minds (presumably our immaterial  souls), and in so far as images are “in the corporeal  imagination” they should not properly be called ideas at all  (Cottingham et al., 1991 pp. 185; see also Meditation  3, 40). The thought here seems to be that all ideas as such are  in our minds, although some of them are caused or occasioned by the  presence of an image on the pineal surface. It is beyond the scope of this entry to determine what was truly Descartes' considered view.  What is clear, however, is that Descartes' readers would have readily been able to find a concept of the idea as a picture-like  image in his writings. In his Optics (1637, discourses 4 & 6), Descartes likens the images of his theory to engravings: flat, perspective projections of visual scenes. It is notable, however, that this comparison is  made in the course of an argument to the effect that the  representations in the brain that cause our perceptual and  imaginative experiences need not actually resemble their  objects: the resemblance between an engraving and what it depicts is, after all, very partial and imperfect. What matters, for Descartes,  is that the conscious soul is appropriately affected by the movements that the process of image formation causes in the pineal gland. Thus  it is the functional role of the image, not its actual physical  nature, that is important. In this regard, Descartes' view is very  close (at least in terms of functional architecture) to the  contemporary quasi-pictorial theory of Kosslyn (1980, 1994,  2005; Kosslyn, Thompson, & Ganis, 2006 – see   section 4.4.2  and   supplement: Quasi-Pictorial Theory ).  In both cases, it is claimed that although the material image in the  brain is, in fact, picture-like, what actually makes it a  mental image (or an idea) is not its  two-dimensional neural instantiation, but its functional role in  conveying visuo-spatial information to “higher” cognitive powers. As a materialist, Hobbes, unlike Descartes, does not distinguish  between images formed in the brain and ideas in the mind. In fact,  although Hobbes sometimes uses the word 'idea' as a synonym for  'image,' it occurs rather infrequently in his writings, and he  prefers to use 'image' (or 'imagination') or other synonyms such as  'phantasm' or 'appearance.' Images, however, are undoubtedly central to his cognitive theory.  Thought or “Mentall Discourse,” according to Hobbes, is  nothing but a “trayne of imaginations,” an associatively  connected succession of images passing through the mind, whether it  be undirected (as in daydreaming or idle woolgathering) or more  focused and purposive because it is “regulated by some desire, and designe,” by some overarching “Passionate  Thought” (Leviathan I.3 (Hobbes,   1651)).[10] However, it is not necessarily the case that Hobbes thought of his  images, even those of visual appearances, as being picture-like.  Imagination, we are told, “is nothing but decaying  sense” (Leviathan   I.2).[11]  Because Hobbes regarded sensation as a sort of motion or pressure  arising in the brain (or heart) in response to an inward pressure  arising for external objects, the sort of decaying he has in mind  seems unlikely to be that of a picture (or other representational  object) crumbling to dust. Rather, it is that of a movement gradually running out of impetus, a pendulum swing gradually decreasing in  amplitude, or a gas under pressure gradually leaking away.  Furthermore, Hobbes, unlike Descartes, did not think of memory as  being the result of structural changes in the brain, but rather as  arising from the persistence, the very slow dying away, of the  internal motions that were originally set going by sense experience  (Leviathan   I.2).[12]  Hobbesian images, therefore, are processes rather than entities.  Although they are undoubtedly quasi-perceptual experiences  (presumably, in the absence of an immaterial soul, we are to suppose  that they are experienced merely in virtue of their occurring within  the brain) they may not be mental pictures in any very  robust sense. Unlike his predecessors, Locke did not concern himself with the  nature or underlying mechanisms of mental imagery. Henceforth, at  least until the rise of cognitive science in the late 20th century,  that would be seen as the concern of scientists rather than   philosophers[13]  (and as it turned out, the scientists did not have much to say about  the matter either, until, once again, the era of cognitive science).  Furthermore, Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding  (1690) uses the words 'image' and 'imagination' only rarely (White,  1990; Ayers, 1991 p.   45).[14]  However, he has a great deal to say about ideas, which are  the vehicles of thought of his cognitive theory. Although what may be the canonical definition of idea as “whatever it is  which the mind can be employed about in thinking”  (Essay I.i.8), seems to be deliberately noncommital about  their nature, there are several passages in Locke's Essay  that suggest that he thought of them, at least when they were of  visual origin, as being picture-like. Indeed, he explicitly refers to ideas as “the pictures drawn in our minds”  (Essay II.x.5; see also II.x.7, II.ix.8, II.xxv.6,  II.xxxi.6, IV.xi.1), and draws an analogy between the way that ideas  enter the mind and the formation of optical images within a  camera obscura (a “dark room”) (Essay  II.xi.17). It is thus hardly surprising that, according to Lowe (2005 p. 38), it remains “orthodox” to interpret Locke as holding that  ideas are pictorial mental images. This orthodoxy is defended by  Ayers (1986, 1991) and White (1990) amongst others, but other recent  Locke scholars, notably Yolton (1956, 1970, 1984, 1985, 1996),  Chappell (1994), and, more tentatively, Lowe (1995, 2005) challenge  it, arguing that the explicit comparisons of ideas with pictures are  all limited merely to bringing out some or other specific aspect of  the nature of ideas, and should not be read as identifying  them with pictures. According to Yolton, there is no  evidence that Locke thought of ideas as entities of any sort (Yolton 1970 p. 134), rather, “To say that we know objects by  means of ideas is to say no more than that objects become known  through sensory awareness” (Yolton, 1985 p. 151). Lowe  expresses what may be much the same underlying thought by suggesting  that Locke may perhaps be interpreted as holding an  “adverbial” theory of ideas, whereby they are construed  as ways (or modes) of experiencing rather than as mental entities  (Lowe, 1995 pp. 42– 47, 2005 pp. 47–48). It is worth noting, however, that some recent philosophers have  argued for just such an “adverbial” account of mental  imagery itself, construing images as modes of experiencing, rather  than the presence to mind of inner entities (Rabb, 1975; Heil, 1982;  Tye, 1984; Thomas, 1999b, 2009; Meijsing, 2006). Enactive theories of  imagery (see   section 4.5.1)  can be viewed as fleshed out versions of this position (Thomas,  1999b). Thus, even if Yolton and others are right to argue that Locke  did not think of ideas (even visual ones) as pictures (imagery in  sense {2}),  or even as inner entities of any sort (sense {3}), he might still have consistently viewed  them as images in sense {1}, as quasi-perceptual experiences. He  certainly held that they arise from   perception,[15]  and that we are conscious of them when we employ them in our thinking (Essay II.i.2–3, I.i.8, II.xxvii.9). Whatever Locke's true intentions may have been, many of his leading  successors and critics, such as Berkeley and Reid, seem to have  understood him as believing that ideas are inner representational  entities, and, when visual, are like inner pictures. Few seem to doubt that Berkeley thought of ideas as being images (but see Pitcher, 1977;  Kasem, 1989). Indeed, his famous and influential attack (in The  Principles of Human Knowledge (1734)) on the possibility of  abstract or general ideas clearly derives most of its persuasiveness  from the assumption that ideas are like pictures: Or again, a general idea of a triangle In effect, Berkeley is arguing that we can form ideas of things that  we have never actually seen just inasmuch as we can form new mental  pictures by the sort of cutting and pasting operations we could  perform with pictures on paper – sticking the picture of a  man's head onto a picture of the body of a horse, for example – but that, just as there is no way of drawing or creating a picture  that inherently depicts the general man or the general triangle, we  can form no such general ideas in our   minds.[16] If ideas are images (and if mental images are pictures), Berkeley's argument (which continues to influence today's discussions of imagery and mental representation (e.g., Fodor, 1975)) may very well be sound. If they are not images at all, it makes little sense (and if mental images are not much like pictures, it is probably invalid). As with Locke, Yolton (1996) argues that Hume did not  understand the ideas of his cognitive theory to be mental  images. However, there is a great deal in Hume's writings (much more  than in Locke's) to suggest otherwise. Indeed, A Treatise of  Human Nature (Hume, 1740) opens by explicitly identifying ideas  with images: ideas are defined as “the faint images of [sensory impressions] in thinking and reasoning”  (Treatise I.i.1). It is conceivable that 'image' might mean  nothing more than 'copy' here, but many other passages in both the  Treatise and the Enquiry Concerning Human  Understanding (1748) suggest that Hume intended it in a much  stronger sense. For example, he refers to the memory one might have  of some site in the Holy Land, after having actually been there, as  both a “lively image” and a “lively idea” of  the place (Treatise I.iii.9), clearly treating the two  expressions as equivalent. Furthermore, ideas are constantly being  described as having their existence in, or being present to, the  imagination or the   fancy,[17]  and we are told that we need only the “slightest  philosophy” to convince us “that nothing can ever be  present to the mind but an image or perception, and that the senses  are only the inlets, through which these images are conveyed”  (Enquiry   XII.1).[18] The passages just cited (and others like them) perhaps imply no more  than that Hume thought of ideas as quasi-perceptual experiences (a  conclusion that Yolton might be able to accept), but the fact that  Hume approvingly repeats Berkeley's argument against general ideas  (Treatise I.iii.1; Enquiry XII.1) suggest that he  also thought of them as picture-like. This is also suggested by his  choice of the word 'impression' to designate the percepts of which  ideas are the images or copies. Clearly the word alludes to the wax  impression model of perception and memory that we find in Plato and  Aristotle, and although Hume, no doubt, does not intend it to be  understood too literally, the fact that he thinks it an appropriate  and innocuous metaphor remains telling. Certainly when Thomas Reid came to develop his influential critique  of “the way of ideas,” in effect a comprehensive  rejection of the idea as the vehicle of thought, he based  many of his arguments upon the assumption that the philosophers he  was criticizing understood ideas to be picture-like images (Reid,  1764,   1785).[19]  Such images, Reid thinks, are simply not capable of playing the  cognitive and epistemological roles that his predecessors had  assigned to them, and the assumption that they do so leads to many  absurdities. Reid is not saying that we do not have quasi-perceptual  experiences, but he wants to deny that these are caused by  representational mental entities that we experience in lieu of some  actually present physical object or scene. When we come to Kant (1781/1787), we find that ideas have  been displaced, as the vehicles of thought, by concepts.  However, images still have a significant role to play in his account  of how our concepts connect to empirical reality. The imagination  (einbildungskraft) must synthesize the inchoate deliverances of the senses, the sensory manifold, into a coherent, meaningful  image, a true representation that the understanding can grasp and  bring under some concept. Unfortunately, Kant was unable to give a  satisfactory account of how the imagination, even in concert with the understanding, can achieve this. We are told that it involves what he calls a schema, a “representation of a universal procedure of  imagination in providing an image for a concept” (1781/1787  B180). We are told that it is only “through” and  “in accordance with” a schema that images become possible (1781/1787 A 142). Unfortunately, however, Thus Kant, in attempting to grapple with problems about the nature of mental representation that the Empiricists had failed to solve, left  the process of image formation, and the nature of the image itself,  deeply mysterious.