 Shortly after Schlick arrived in Vienna, he was invited by the mathematician Hans Hahn to participate in a seminar on Principia Mathematica by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell. Upon its conclusion, Schlick organized (at the request of his students, Herbert Feigl and Friedrich Waismann) organized an extra-curricular discussion group, which came to be called the ‘Schlick Circle’ and (eventually) the ‘Vienna Circle’. Their first reading was Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, written by Russell’s student, Ludwig Wittgenstein (Wittgenstein 1961; Stadler 2001, Ch. 5). Soon, Schlick was writing Wittgenstein, seeking additional copies of his work, telling him about the study group in Vienna, and requesting personal meetings. After several failed attempts, Schlick finally arranged with Wittgenstein’s sister, Margarete Wittgenstein Stonborough, to visit him in early 1927 (McGuinness 1967, 14). The first clear evidence that Schlick had (at last!) obtained a copy of the Tractatus was in a letter to Einstein in June of 1927. (Schlick 1927a) The following month, Schlick effusively described the Tractatus as “the deepest” work of the new philosophy (Schlick 1927b). Over the next few years, Schlick and Wittgenstein met as time permitted, carrying on philosophical discussions ranging over a broad array of topics, from the idea of geometry as syntax, to verificationist and operationalist theories of meaning, topics in logic and mathematics, and even solipsism. Of course, the discussions of verifiability in the late 1920s led to widespread disputes in later positivist thought. But even in the early years, Schlick and his students to wondered how ethical statements might be verifiable. In Problems of Ethics, Schlick attempted to interpret ethical statements as empirical claims about the means for maximizing happiness. Relying on relative judgments of values, Schlick argued that an empirical foundation of an ethical system based on maximum happiness. On Schlick’s account, happiness is not to be construed superficially but as the elated sense of fulfillment that accompanies actions carried out for their own sake. Hence, there are no apriori moral statements fixing absolute moral values. Wittgenstein dictated some of his thoughts to Schlick, including a strident verificationist series of remarks, and shared several manuscripts with Schlick as well, including (perhaps) his so-called ‘Big Typescript’ of 1932–1933 (Iven 2009, Wittgenstein 2005).  Several other documents survive the period, particularly notes taken by Schlick’s student, Friedrich Waismann, when he accompanied Schlick on his visits to Wittgenstein (McGuinness 1967). In addition, there were joint travels undertaken by Wittgenstein and Schlick during the period of their interaction (Iven 2009; Stadler 2001, Ch. 6). The principal effect of this influence on Schlick was the assimilation, into his already well-defined philosophical views, of insights stimulated by these conversations. During the same period, Rudolf Carnap joined the faculty of the University of Vienna as well as the Schlick Zirkel. He brought a manuscript with him, which he called “Konstitutionstheorie”, and which was eventually published, with Schlick’s help, as The Logical Structure of the World (Carnap 1928). Schlick even assisted Carnap in locating a publisher for the work. It was at this time that Schlick penned the essay “Experience, Cognition, and Metaphysics” of 1926, which represents a particularly important juncture in his thinking. Schlick attempted to link current influences on his thought – Wittgenstein’s Tractatus  and Carnap’s Aufbau – with his earlier ideas, especially the distinction between intuitions and concepts (Schlick 2008, pp. 33–56; Wittgenstein 1961; Carnap 1928; Schlick 2009, Sec. 7). Within a few years, Schlick wrote the essays which are characteristic of his early Positivist thought. The first one, “The Turning Point in Philosophy,” appeared in 1930. It contains an early version of the thesis that the function of philosophy is the analysis of meaning (Schlick 1979b, 154–160). A more decisive article was the 1932 essay, “Positivism and Realism”, a classic piece which shaped some of the most characteristic philosophical work to emerge from the Positivist tradition (Schlick 1979b, 259–284). Schlick interprets the verifiability principle strictly, by spelling out verification in terms of sensible experience, but at the same time broadly, construed to admit any logically conceivable circumstances of verification (like the future verification of mountains on the far side of the moon). The basis of this principle, Schlick argues, is to be found in scientific practice. He cites Einstein’s analysis of “simultaneity” in Special Relativity as his primary example, an illustration which would become a staple of Positivist lore. Schlick also mentioned Planck, who acknowledged that experience was the source of scientific knowledge.  Schlick called the philosophical view founded on this principle, “Logical Positivism”, using the designation introduced by A. E. Blumberg and Herbert Feigl (Blumberg and Feigl, 1931). As Schlick explained it, Logical Positivism is essentially a realist epistemology, like the one developed in Schlick’s General Theory of Knowledge, which shares little with the classical positivism of  Auguste Comte,  Ernst Mach, and Hans Vaihinger. Schlick’s principal conclusion was that Logical Positivism never denies the reality of material objects but, rather, equates physical reality with the lawfulness of experience. Unfortunately, Planck, who had always supported Schlick in the past, misunderstood the essay, interpreting it as a polemic for Machian positivism, and harshly condemning it (Planck 1932).