 Although Schlick was originally trained in Physics, it is important to remember that, in late 19th Century Germany, physicists were deeply interested in philosophical issues, especially at Berlin. Schlick was the intellectual heir of both  Hermann von Helmholtz, a major figure among 19th Century physicists and a champion of the zurück zu Kant movement and Max Planck. In 1889, Planck succeeded Gustav Kirchhoff and became Helmholtz’ colleague. Both Helmholtz and Planck integrated Kantian themes in their philosophical thinking and there can be no doubt that, even though Schlick could never be considered much of a Kantian, he was deeply sympathetic with many of Kant’s ideas. To begin with, Kant’s interests in epistemological concerns arising from the advanced mathematical sciences attracted Schlick’s admiration and respect, much as it had drawn the interests of Helmholtz and Planck. And all three embraced the goal of developing a philosophical understanding of recent developments in physical science in the spirit, if not the letter, of Kant’s thought. For the most part, their departures from Kant’s original doctrines may be viewed as innovations or improvements of Kant’s insights, introduced without abandoning their own most fundamental philosophical commitments. For instance, one of Helmholtz’ most well-known innovations is the study of perception in his monumental Handbook of Physiological Optics (1856–1867) (Helmholtz 1924–5). This work was the source of his so-called ‘sign-theory’, based on the idea that perceptions are signs or place-holders for what they signify, but do not resemble or copy them in any way. In his early writings, Helmholtz thought sensations are signs of their external causes, so the associations among sensations represent corresponding regularities among their sources. Consequently, it is the regular changes of signs, their serial structure, which reflects the order of their underlying causes. But this latter consequence implies a causal theory of perception which is fundamentally antithetical to Kant’s understanding of causality. After all, Kant had restricted the operations of causality to the realm of appearances, thus excluding unobservable causes lying behind and causing observable phenomena. But this departure from a basic tenet of Kant’s thought was compounded by the fact that Helmholtz’ account of the knowledge of the location of objects in space is thoroughly empiricist, and also rests on the principle of causality, understood as a causal realist would. But in his 1881 notes to his memoir, Helmholtz corrected himself, recalling that Kant’s views on causality were limited to lawfulness among appearances (Friedman 2010, 631; Friedman 1997, 30–1). What Helmholtz then asserted, in his classic essay “On the Facts of Perception,” is that the inference to a hypostasized reality lying behind the appearances goes beyond what is warranted by the lawfulness obtaining among appearances. Indeed, all localizations of objects in space are really nothing more than the discovery of the lawfulness of the connections obtaining among our motions and our perceptions. The difference between what is genuinely perceived and its realistic interpretation is just the difference between the regularities in our perceptions and the hypothesis of enduring, substantial sources of the perceived regularities (Helmholtz 1977, 138–140). Although Helmholtz’ philosophical work was not particularly well-received by professional philosophers like  Hermann Cohen, co-founder of the Marburg School of neo-Kantians, it exerted a powerful influence on physicists (Cohen 1885, 202–204). In particular, Max Planck was an early supporter of the sign-theory. But Planck never interpreted the sign-theory causally, like Helmholtz had in his earliest writings. Rather, Planck recognized that “our perceptions provide, not a representation of the external world” but, rather, “measurements furnish the physicist with a sign which he must interpret” (Planck 1960, 53; Planck 1933, 84). Furthermore, Planck generalized the sign-theory, arguing that it is not objects, in and of themselves, which are known, but the structural relations in which they stand to one another. His fundamental idea was that what is known are not the natures of ‘things’ but complex structures of relations connecting ‘things’ to one another (Planck 1933, 84ff. and 1960, 53). Thus, the ‘objects of knowledge’ are not objects at all but, rather, what is known are the relata of the structural networks of relations in which they stand to other relata. And, as recent developments have increased the level of abstraction of scientific thought, it has become further removed from its anthropomorphic origins. So the unification of the scientific world-picture is achieved through increasing abstraction which, in turn, drives structural representation, thus reducing the anthropomorphic elements in the scientific image of the world (Planck 1949, 105).  The result of Planck’s effort is a theory of knowledge which is structuralist, generalized from Helmholtz’ sign-theory of perception, but which nonetheless preserves the themes of unification and objectivity derived from Kant. These themes are particularly evident in Planck’s celebrated (1908) Leiden lecture on “The Unity of the Physical Universe”, directed at Ernst Mach’s phenomenalistic Naturphilosophie (Planck 1960, 1–26). Without going into details, Mach regarded physical objects as unnecessary hypostasizations, implying that the mechanical view underlying physics is little more than an elaborate myth. The physics of the matter were effectively settled when Planck secured the mechanical foundations of irreversibility in his Radiation Law of 1900 by relying on Ludwig Boltzmann’s statistical approach to thermodynamics which, in turn, implied atomism. Yet it remained to establish the philosophical implications of these achievements. In his Leiden lecture, Planck argued that this result presented an objective world-picture abstracted from its anthropomorphic origins to produce a synthetically unified image of the world (Planck 1960, 6). Such a view, Planck argued, can only be produced through the unification of the diverse fields of physical phenomena if they are synthesized by means of mathematical abstraction. Such abstraction generalizes the sign-theory to apply to theoretical as well as perceptual representations, resulting in a full-blown structuralist epistemology (Planck 1933, 84ff.; Planck 1949, 105). And it is this method of abstraction that produces the synthetic unity grounding scientific objectivity.  The result is that physical entities are ‘objective’, in the Kantian sense, since they embody the lawfulness of appearances. Indeed, Planck insisted that what is ‘objective’ is precisely what the heroes of the history of science, from Copernicus to Faraday, would have regarded as ‘real’ (Planck 1970, 25–6).  Despite the strident Kantian themes of Planck’s argument, his conclusion has always been regarded as a particularly virulent form of convergent realism (Stölzner 2010).