 Baruch Spinoza (1632–77) and David Hume (1711–76) are often identified as the originators of neutral monism. The case for including Spinoza runs as follows: Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance has been called neutral monism; it is a form of monism because it allows for only one substance, and it is neutral because he describes the one substance as both a body and a mind (Rosenkrantz and Hoffman 2011: 287) To classify Spinoza as an existence monist may be permissible. But the neutrality claim is based on the problematical both view of view of neutrality. This suggests that it is best to classify Spinoza as a double aspect theorist (see section  8.3  below). Hume’s case is more difficult to assess. It has been said that the prevalent 20th century interpretation of Hume has been neutral monist (see Flage 1982: 527). H.H. Price’s case for this view has been particularly influential (see Price 1932: 105–6). On the other hand, the neutral monist interpretation of Hume has been vigorously resisted (Flage 1982; Backhaus 1991). In light of these difficulties it is best to start the genealogy of neutral monism with the big three: Ernst Mach, William James, and Bertrand Russell. Of the three, only Russell uses the label “neutral monism”. But there is widespread agreement that Mach, James, and Russell are the three most important philosophers in this tradition. A striking feature of traditional neutral monism—a reflection of the empiricist leanings of its protagonists—is the close tie between the neutral entities and experience. This connection has given rise to one of the most enduring criticisms of neutral monism (see section  7.2).  It is therefore important to note that this salient feature of traditional neutral monism need be no part of it (see section  5.1). Ernst Mach (1838–1916) occupies a central position in the history of neutral monism. He influenced William James and Bertrand Russell and, through them, all of the writers on neutral monism in the English speaking world. His importance for the development in the German speaking world is hard to overestimate. Among the philosophers to build on Mach’s ideas was Rudolf Carnap in his Aufbau (1928). As a physicist who also did physiological and psychological research, Mach strove to adopt an inclusive and economical framework that would allow him to pursue all of these inquiries in a unified and coherent fashion. In the simple components of experience—hot and cold, red and green, sweet and sour, etc.—he finds typical examples of a much larger group of elements whose functional interrelations are studied by the various sciences (see Banks 2014, ch. 1 on the resolute realism of Mach's view). While a given element is, intrinsically, neither mental nor physical, the various groups to which it belongs may display functional relationships that are characteristic of physics or of psychology. In this case the neutral element forms part of the subject matter of physics and of psychology. In the following quotation Mach uses a color and our perception of it to illustrate this point. A single neutral element—the color—gets to be both the physical color of a physical object and our mental perception/sensation of it. The color can be called physical, qua constituent of the one group, and mental (a sensation), qua constituent of the other group, but is the same unchanging and intrinsically neutral element that figures in these two different contexts: Thus the great gulf between physical and psychological research persists only when we acquiesce in our habitual stereotyped conceptions. A color is a physical object as soon as we consider its dependence, for instance, upon its luminous source, upon other colors, upon temperatures, upon spaces, and so forth. When we consider, however, its dependence upon the retina…it is a psychological object, a sensation. Not the subject matter, but the direction of investigation, is different in the two domains. (Mach 1886: 17–18) In this way material objects and the ego are dissolved into elements/sensations that are related in certain complex ways. Spelled out for material objects, this reads: thing, body, matter, are nothing apart from the combinations of the elements,—the colors, sounds, and so forth—nothing apart from their so-called attributes. (Mach 1886: 7) And the fate of the ego is similar: The primary fact is not the ego, but the elements (sensations)…The elements constitute the I. I have the sensation green, signifies that the element green occurs in a given complex of other elements (sensations, memories). When I cease to have the sensation green, when I die, then the elements no longer occur in the ordinary, familiar association. That is all. Only and ideal mental-economical unity, not a real unity, has ceased to exist. (Mach 1886: 23–24) For Mach the world presents itself as “a viscous mass [of elements], at certain places (as in the ego) more firmly coherent than in others” (Mach 1886: 17). The neutral elements (only a minute fraction of which are sensations) and their relations are the basic reality. We draw boundaries around certain groups of elements that are related to each other in interesting ways, because this serves our purposes—the purposes of science and of ordinary life. We can continue to talk about material things and selves; it is economical to do so. But, strictly speaking, “both [object and ego] are provisional fictions of the same kind” (Mach 1905: 9). The primary source for Mach’s views on neutral monism are a number of essays and chapters contained in his books that were originally published in Mach 1886, 1894, and 1905. The size of these books grew significantly as they went through numerous editions. Some of the important papers on neutral monism are not contained in the available English translations of these works. William James’s (1842–1910) uses the term “radical empiricism” for the view he sets forth in James 1912—the view that has become the paradigm of neutral monism. His critique of the relational account of experience—according to which the self directs an act onto an object—was the model upon which Russell later shaped his analysis of experience. James presents this argument as an attack on a particular conception of consciousness. He finds it in the Neo-Kantian tradition and in the early analytic tradition. And today we can find it in philosophies as diverse as existentialism and philosophical naturalism. Roughly, it is the notion of consciousness as a diaphanous, transparent, elusive medium or container of some sort in which the objects of consciousness appear. The objects that are, in this sense, “in” consciousness simply present themselves to us. But the consciousness that makes this kind of object presentation possible eludes our grasp. This thin notion of consciousness is the one James wants to eliminate: I believe that ‘consciousness,’ when once it has evaporated to this estate of pure diaphaneity, is on the point of disappearing altogether. It is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumor left behind by the disappearing ‘soul’ upon the air of philosophy. (James 1904b: 2) His radical proposal is to simply discard this shadowy something and to make do with what remains, with what used to be the object of the conscious act. He introduces the term “pure experience” to stand for this datum. Prior to any further categorization, pure experience is, according to James, neutral—neither mental nor physical: The instant field of the present is at all times what I call the ‘pure’ experience. It is only virtually or potentially either object or subject as yet. For the time being, it is plain, unqualified actuality, or existence, a simple that. (James 1904b: 23) Mind and matter, knower and known, thought and thing, representation and represented are then interpreted as resulting from different functional groupings of pure experience (see James 1905: 64). In perceptual knowledge perceiver and perceived fuse or merge (James uses both terms): one bit of pure experience is the thing perceived as well as the perceiving of this thing. The difference lies only in how this single portion of pure experience is related to other parts of pure experience: The paper seen and the seeing of it are only two names for one indivisible fact which, properly named, is the datum, the phenomenon, or the experience. The paper is in the mind and the mind is around the paper, because paper and mind are only two names that are given later to the one experience, when, taken in a larger world of which it forms a part, its connections are traced in different directions. To know immediately, then, or intuitively, is for mental content and object to be identical. (James 1895: 110) Conceptual knowledge is more complex. In the simplest case of conceptual representation we are dealing with two pieces of actual experience belonging to the same subject, with definite tracts of conjunctive transitional experience between them. (James 1904a: 53) The first piece of pure experience is the thought—the thinking of it as well as the content that is thought—perhaps it is a thought about Harvard’s Memorial Hall, as in James’s famous example (see James 1904a: 55ff). And, in the simplest case, the second piece of pure experience is the thing—Memorial Hall—that was thought of, as well as the perception of Memorial Hall. The thought has led us to Memorial Hall and now we stand in front of it and see it. It is this function of leading (about the details of which James has much to say) that constitutes the thought’s intentionality, that constitutes the fact that the thought was a thought about a certain thing. Once the thought has lead one to the Hall, the percept not only verifies the concept, proves its function of knowing that percept to be true, but the percept’s existence as the terminus of the chain of intermediaries creates the function. Whatever terminates that chain was, because it now proves itself to be, what the concept ‘had in mind’. (James 1904a: 60–1) This is James’s way of reconstructing the idea of representation in a way that does not invoke suspect mental powers of intrinsic intentionality. He values this as a signal achievement of his radical empiricism: The towering importance for human life of this kind of knowing lies in the fact that an experience that knows another can figure as its representative, not in any quasi-miraculous ‘epistemological’ sense, but in the definite practical sense of being its substitute in various operations, sometimes physical and sometimes mental, which lead us to its associates and results. (James 1904a: 61) Not all conceptual experience results in knowledge. If the process of leading does not get started, or fails to arrive at an experience of termination, there is nothing that the first piece of experience gets to know. In that case the representation is empty or false. The essays in which James sets out his radical empiricism are among the most influential and most readable documents of the neutral monistic literature. It is probably fair to say that James converted Russell to neutral monism. And his influence on the neutral monists among the American New Realists is massive. The primary source for James’s views on neutral monism are the essays collected in his 1912. Following a series of critical engagements with neutral monism (see especially Russell 1914a,b), Russell adopted it in Russell 1919 and remained a neutral monist for the rest of his long career: “I am conscious of no major change in my opinions since the adoption of neutral monism” is what he says in an interview from 1964 (Eames 1969: 108). But the question whether Russell’s neutral monism is best seen as a single theory or as a sequence of related but significantly different theories, as well as the question which, if any, of these different doctrines should count as versions of neutral monism, have been much debated (see Wishon 2015; Bostock 2012; Stace 1946). Russell’s 1919 and 1921 are generally considered to represent the early versions of his neutral monism. Russell’s 1927a and 1927b contain the mature doctrine. In his later works—Russell 1948 and 1956a—he no longer used the term “neutral monism”. But the doctrine seems largely unchanged. When Russell looks at neutral monism, he sees a theory that embodies the spirit of the “supreme maxim in scientific philosophising” (Russell 1914c: 155) in an especially striking way. This maxim is Occam’s Razor: entities are not to be multiplied without necessity. In one of Russell’s formulations it reads: “Wherever possible, substitute constructions out of known entities for inferences to unknown entities” (Russell 1924: 326). Known entities are those that we know directly or noninferentially; unknown entities are ones we accept only on the basis of inferences from known entities. Russell’s maxim encourages us to discover complex structures of known entities that can play the role the inferred entities were supposed to play. Upon substituting these complex structures—the constructions—for the inferred entities, everything continues to work as before. The point of this complicated procedure is epistemic: we are now no longer burdened with the risky inference to the inferred entity, and the risk of error is reduced. Russell remains agnostic as to the existence of the target entities of construction. They are neither identified with nor eliminated by the corresponding construction. And no claim about supervenience, emergence, constitution, or grounding is implied. Neutral monism holds out the alluring promise that such constructions can be found for all of the inferred entities of physics, of psychology, and of common sense. All of these bodies of knowledge are preserved, but at a hugely reduced epistemic cost. These are the considerations that drive Russell to embrace neutral monism: it is a perfect fit with his longstanding commitment to the program of logical construction. An added benefit of substituting constructions of neutral entities for physical and mental entities is an elegant solution to the mind-body problem. Logical construction is a process of discovery, not of manipulation: to logically construct xs out of ys is to discover that ys, when they manifest a certain type of structure, can play the role of xs. Russell’s constructions of a point in space, an instant in time, a table, and of a belief may illustrate the procedure. (i) A Russian doll is a good model of how Russell (following Whitehead) proposes to construct a point in space. The rough idea is to take “the class of all those objects which, as one would naturally say, contain the point” (Russell 1914a: 117) and to substitute this class of nested objects (the structure of ys) for points in space (the xs). (ii) Experienced instants in time (the xs) are constructed by discovering that the experiences of a person, each of which is extended in time, can overlap each other in ways that converge on an instant. It is a group of events, all belonging to his experience, and having the following two properties: (1) any two of the events overlap; (2) no event outside the group overlaps with every member of the group. (Russell 1927b: 288) (iii) Rather than viewing a table as the cause of our table sensations, Russell proposes (again just as a first approximation) to view the table as “the set of all those particulars which would naturally be called ‘aspects’ of the table from different points of view” (Russell 1921: 98). (iv) The logical construction that is to take the place of beliefs consists of the following three components: (a) We have a proposition, consisting of interrelated images, and possibly partly of sensations; (b) we have the feeling of assent, which is presumably a complex sensation demanding analysis; (c) we have a relation, actually subsisting, between the assent and the proposition, such as is expressed by saying that the proposition in question is what is assented to. (Russell 1921: 251) As these examples show, there is no single method of construction, no single type of structure, suitable for different projects of logical construction. The nature of the xs (the targets of construction) and of the ys (the construction materials) guide the search for structures that will work in the case at hand. The initial stock of known entities with which Russell proposes to carry out this grand project of logical construction seems frightfully small and strikingly non-neutral. It consists of his sensations and images—these loom large in Russell 1919, 1921—and his perceptions (percepts)—these play a prominent role in Russell 1927a, 1927b, 1948. Everything else—electrons, apples, galaxies, and selves, etc.—is in need of logical construction. For an entity to be neutral is to “have neither the hardness and indestructibility of matter, nor the reference to objects which is supposed to characterize the mind” (Russell 1921: 36; cf. 124). Russell never suspected sensations of being material (in this sense). That sensations are mental (in this sense)—that they consist of a mental act of sensing directed at a non-mental object—was, however, a pivotal part of his earlier view. But then his views changed: I formerly believed that my own inspection showed me the distinction between a noise [the object] and my hearing of a noise [the act of sensing], and I am now convinced that it shows me no such thing, and never did. (Russell 1918b: 255) All that Russell now finds upon introspecting a sensory episode is a single item “which may be called indifferently a noise or hearing a noise” (Russell 1918b: 255). Switching the example to colors, he writes that the sensation we have when we see a patch of colour simply is that patch of colour…the patch of colour and our sensation in seeing it are identical. (Russell 1921: 142–3) And since noises and patches of color are not intentional—they are not directed at anything, they are simply there—sensations are non-mental. This establishes the neutrality of sensations. And because images have the same intrinsic nature as sensations (cf. Russell 1921: 117, 121, 154, 156, 287, 297), they too are  neutral.[3]  Percepts are composed of sensations and images and inherit their neutrality. Russell’s focus on sensations, images, and percepts explains why Russell’s neutral monism has often been dismissed as a form of phenomenalism. But in the preceding section we have seen how Russell argued for the nonmentality of these items. Moreover this criticism overlooks that Russell worked with a vastly expanded set of construction materials. He allows for the enlargement of the realm of the known by a series of cautious  inferences.[4]  In a first step he argues that “all our percepts are composed of imperceptible parts” (Russell 1927a: 282); second, there are sensations, images, and percepts that are not our own; third, and most importantly, we can infer the existence of vast numbers of entities that “do not form part of any experience” (Russell 1921:  25).[5]  In this way Russell arrives at the view “that the world is very full of events” (Russell 1927a: 258), only a vanishingly small number of which are his own experiences. Our own percepts, images, and  sensations[6]  occupy a privileged place in this system of entities—they are “what is most indubitable in our knowledge of the world” (Russell 1927b: 139). This knowledge is of a “more intimate qualitative” (Russell 1927a: 389) kind; it reveals the intrinsic character of these entities. But our knowledge of the “physical world [the world constructed out of entities outside my experience] is purely abstract: “we know certain logical characteristics of its structure, but nothing of its intrinsic character” (Russell 1927b: 306–307). Russell takes all of these different entities to be neutral (in the Neither Sense); and he takes all of them to be  events[7],  where an event is understood as “something occupying a small finite amount of space–time” (Russell 1927b: 287). The noise and the color patch considered above are typical examples of events. A Russellian event is absolute, in C.D. Broad’s sense: “it should not itself be a state of invariance or of change in the qualities or relationships of any thing” (Broad 1959: 739; see also Maxwell 1978: 385–6 on pure events). According to Russell, physics teaches that events “just happen, and do not happen ‘to’ matter or ‘to’ anything else” (Russell 1927b: 289). This means that we must not think of mental events (or any events) “as consisting of motions of bits of matter” (Russell 1927b: 292), for “matter in motion…is not an event in our sense” (Russell 1927b: 296). Russell’s neutral monist universe is a plenum of (absolute) events—a vast assemblage of overlapping small occurrences which, given their short lifespan, are constantly replaced by new events. This mass of ever-changing events manifests all sorts of complex dynamic patterns. We have not yet discovered the laws that govern these events and give rise to the formation of these complex dynamic patterns. But we have physics, which describes the behavior of certain groups of law-governed events under the name of matter. And we have psychology, which describes a set of quite different regularities that obtain in very specific regions of this plenum of events—viz. in those regions that are filled by the pieces of matter that are called brains. But all the building blocks of the logical constructions that are matter, and all the building blocks of the logical constructions that are mental stats, have the same nature—they are neutral events. There are, of course, many other philosophers whom one might want to include in the list of neutral monists. In the German speaking world we find Richard Avenarius (1843–96), who was in contact with Mach, and Joseph Petzoldt (1862–1929), who built on the work of Avenarius. Avenarius’s main reflections on neutral monism are contained in Avenarius 1888/90, 1891, and 1894/95. Petzoldt’s relevant works are Petzoldt 1900, 1904 and 1906. In the English speaking world, neutral monism thrived within the movement of American new realism. Ralph Barton Perry (1876–1957)—a student and friend of James—is the most visible neutral monist of this group. His 1912 is the main source for his views about neutral monism. And Edwin B. Holt (1873–1946) developed an ambitious neutral monist program in his 1912 and 1914.