 Every version of reductionism must deal with the question of the ontological status of the entities it reduces: are they retained or eliminated? Both of these components are present in traditional neutral monism. It eliminates mind and matter as these are traditionally conceived. There are neither “solid persistent objects moving through space”, nor are there states with an inbuilt and primitive “reference to objects” (Russell 1921: 124, 36). But, on the other hand, it provides constructions of neutral entities that are designed to play the roles of the entities they displace. On this picture there is no sharp boundary between retention and elimination. As the distance between the two roles—that played by the target entity, and that played by its neutral monist replacement—increases we move from the pole of retention toward that of elimination. The success of this strategy will have to be assessed on a case by case basis. There are relatively few objections to neutral monism that turn on the details of proposed reductions. (But see C.D. Broad’s critique of Russell, 1925: 577–584). This fact may, however, owe less to the excellence than to the rarity of such reductions in the literature. The most challenging criticisms of neutral monism do not engage with technical details, but aim squarely at the central idea of the doctrine—the idea of neutrality. The most frequent type of objection to the traditional versions of neutral monism is that they are all forms of mentalistic monism: Berkleyan idealism, panpsychism, or phenomenalism. The argument is simple: sensations (Mach), pure experience (James) and sensations/percepts (Russell) are paradigms of non-neutral, mental entities. Hence there is nothing neutral about these versions of neutral monism. The prima facie plausibility of this objection is beyond doubt. But it is also clear that Mach, James, and Russell were acutely aware of the problem and took themselves to have responded in a satisfactory manner. They reject the view that a sensation or an experience consists of a subject directing a mental act—awareness, consciousness, acquaintance—onto on an object. Dispensing with the subject and the act, they are left with what used to be the object—a red patch, say. And they hold that there is nothing mental about red patches. All it takes for this red patch to turn into a red-sensation is for it to be appropriately related to other entities of the same kind. There is no quick way to adjudicate this dispute. A careful assessment of each case is required. This type of objection—the “mentalism suspicion”—has been articulated by a diverse group of philosophers, among them: (Lenin 1909: 34; Stace 1946; Ayer 1971; Feigl 1958: 426, 1975: 26–7; Maxwell 1976: 354; Popper & Eccles 1977: 199; Strawson 1994: 97; Chalmers 1996: 155; Tully 2003: 355, 369). The second type of objection to neutral monism argues that neutral monism cannot accommodate experience. The argument is driven by two deep metaphysical convictions. First, experience cannot be reduced to (or constructed from) the non-experiential; second, strong emergence (see section  8.4  below) is unintelligible. Assuming that the neutral must be non-experiential, it follows that the neutral monist world has no room for experience. Galen Strawson has wielded this argument against all forms of traditional materialism, and occasionally also against neutral monism (see Strawson 1994: 46–54, 96–99; Strawson 2016.). Chalmers’s main objection to the panqualityist form of neutral monism (see section  4.3.2  above) though stated in different terms, leads up to the same result. There is no path that leads from the qualities we experience (but which are not experiential themselves) to the experience of those qualities. Having an experience is a matter of having phenomenal qualities. Phenomenal qualities involve awareness of qualities. But “no instantiations of qualities ever necessitate awareness of qualities” (Chalmers 2015: 273). This “quality/awareness gap” (Chalmers 2015: 273) shows that no structure of qualities can add up to  experience.[13] But is it really true that the resources of neutral monism are too limited to “manufacture” awareness? Here it is instructive to reflect briefly on Russell’s changing ideas about awareness. Before embracing neutral monism, Russell defended a simple and very influential account of awareness: to be aware of x (a red sense-datum, say) just is to bear a special (simple and unanalyzable) relation to x—the so-called acquaintance relation. We have seen that Russell abandoned this account of awareness (see section  4.3.2  above). But perhaps it is possible to rebuild a structurally similar account of awareness within the neutral monist framework. In place of a simple (Cartesian style) subject or self, there now is a complex bundle-self (composed of neutral events). In place of a simple two-place relation of acquaintance, there now is a complex n-place relation obtaining between x (a red patch, say) and the various other events composing the complex bundle self of which the red patch is a member. And for S (the bundle-self) to be aware of x (the red patch) just is for x to bear this special n-place relation to x to the other members of the bundle that make up S. The overall shape of the two accounts of awareness is the same: a self bearing a special relation to an object. This suggests the following thought: if it is granted that Russell’s old account of awareness did shed some light one the question how experience enters the world, then why not accept that the new (neutral monistically reconstructed) account of awareness is equally illuminating. So if the quality/awareness gap had no force against Russell’s old account of awareness, then we should not expect it to have force against the neutral monistically reconstructed account of awareness. This does not establish that neutral monism can overcome the problem of experience. Both accounts can be rejected, either on the grounds that experience is fundamental and unanalyzable, or on the grounds that they misconstrue the nature of experience. And even if Russell’s original analysis is accepted, its neutral monistic reconstruction may be rejected, on the grounds that the assumed analogy does not hold. So what we have here is no more than a tentative proposal how the traditional neutral monist, and the contemporary panqualityist, might begin to think about the difficult problem of accommodating experience in the neutral monist framework. To the extent that his proposal succeeds, it does raise a question suggested by Strawson’s argument above: is experience, thus understood in a neutral monist setting, a feature that is emergent in an objectionable way (see section  8.4  below)? The neutral monism of Mach and James is committed to naively realistic account of perceptual experience (see section  6.4  above). Nonveridical experiences—illusions, hallucinations, dreams, etc.—are difficult to accommodate within naïve realism. For the entities needed to constitute nonveridical experiences—e.g., the pink rat that the drunkard “sees”—do not exist. But traditional neutral monism provides an ontology rich enough to address this problem. The pink shape experienced by the drunkard exists: it is a portion of pure experience (James), or an element (Mach). This much naïve realism is true, even in the cases of nonveridical experience. But the pink rat that the drunkard takes himself to see does not exist—the pink patch he sees is not a member of a group of neutral elements that constitute a rat. There is nothing wrong with the drunkard’s visual experience; what is mistaken is his assumption that what he sees is a rat. Russell (though not a naïve realist himself) states this point most succinctly: “There are in fact no illusions of the senses, but only mistakes in interpreting sensational data as signs of things other than themselves” (Russell 1948: 149–50). Mach puts the point as follows: When we consider elements like red, green, hot, cold and the rest, which are physical and mental in virtue of their dependence on both external and internal circumstances, and are in both respects immediately given and identical, the question as to illusion and reality loses its sense. Here we are simultaneously confronted by the elements of the real world and of the ego. The only possible further question of interest concerns their functional interdependence…. (Mach 1905: 7–8)