 There is, then, considerable disagreement about how to interpret the notion of neutrality. The notion of monism raises its own problems. But since these are questions faced by all forms of monism, they are, perhaps, not quite as pressing as the problems surrounding neutrality. Much like one can distinguish different versions of neutral monism on the basis of the notion of neutrality that they employ, it is possible to distinguish different versions of the doctrine, based on the various ways in which the notion of monism is understood (see Schaffer 2016). Neutral monism might, for example, be interpreted as a form of existence monism—the view that only a single concrete thing exists; but it might also interpreted as a monism about the kinds of things there are—the view that concrete things, be they simple or complex, are of the same neutral kind. The evidence suggests that all past and present versions of neutral monism have been pluralist on both these counts: they work with a plurality of entities, most particularly, with a plurality of basic neutral entities; and, given their focus on the mind-body problem, they recognize at least mental and physical kinds of entities in addition to the neutral entities. All entities belonging to such non-neutral kinds must, however, count as derivative. In the final analysis, all entities must be basic neutral entities or complexes of basic neutral entities. The talk about basic entities indicates another pluralist dimension: the known versions of neutral monism work with a layered picture of reality. Basic neutral entities form the bottom level of the hierarchy; the non-basic, non-neutral entities at the higher levels reduce to, or are in some sense derivative from, those lower level neutral entities. So we are dealing with an ontology that recognizes a plurality of levels or layers in reality. And even within the level of the basic neutral entities we can distinguish those versions of neutral monism that hold that all basic entities belong to a single category, from those that distinguish two or more categories of neutral entities. Russell’s later version of neutral monism seems to be monistic (in this particular sense): all neutral entities are events. But it is easy to envision a neutral monism that countenances neutral substances and neutral properties among the basic neutral entities.