 Quantifier accounts of ontological commitment, we have seen, are liable to miss the implicit ontological commitments of theories because they look exclusively to the values of the variables of quantification. Entailment accounts succeed in capturing implicit commitments, but are liable to overgenerate if the entailment relation fails to be sensitive to relevant ontological distinctions. According to truthmaker accounts of ontological commitment, being a truthmaker for a theory is just such a relevant ontological distinction: to find the ontological commitments of a theory, we should look towards the truthmakers for that theory; a theory is ontologically committed to Ks only if Ks are needed in order to make the theory true. According to truthmaker theorists, focusing on truthmakers will eliminate spurious ontological commitments of an entailment theory. The problem for a truthmaker account, however, is how to do this without also eliminating genuine ontological commitments.[28] Truthmaker accounts, like entailment accounts, have the feature that ontological commitment depends only on the content of a theory, not on its logical form. That will be so if the primary truthbearers are taken to be non-linguistic propositions (individuated by content) rather than sentences. In that case, ontological commitment applies directly to the propositions, or to theories construed as sets of propositions, and only indirectly to the sentences, or sets of sentences, that express those propositions. That has the benefit, as with the entailment account, of freeing the notion of ontological commitment from language (see §2.1).  But taking propositions to be truthbearers will not be to every truthmaker theorist's liking. Moreover, different views on the nature of propositions—possible worlds accounts, Russellian accounts, Fregean accounts, to name a few—lead to somewhat different truthmaker accounts. To remain neutral in what follows with respect to the existence and nature of propositions, sentences will be taken to be the bearers of truth, and ontological commitment will continue to be applied to theories construed as sets of sentences.[29] Say that an entity makes true (or is a truthmaker for) a sentence or theory if the existence of that entity is, in some sense, sufficient for the truth of the sentence or theory. (It is left open for now just how to understand this notion of sufficiency.) In some cases, truthmakers are easy to come by. For example, the sentence ‘Socrates exists’ has Socrates as a truthmaker (assuming, at any rate, that Socrates has real existence; see §3.2 below). The sentence ‘Elephants exist’ has multiple truthmakers: each and every particular elephant (assuming elephants are necessarily elephants; see §3.3 below). Other cases are more problematic. Consider the conjunction: ‘Socrates exists and Plato exists’. Neither Socrates nor Plato, by himself, is a truthmaker for the conjunction; we need the pair of Socrates and Plato. But how should we understand ‘pair’ here? There are three options. If one is a universalist about mereological composition—for any things, there is a mereological sum composed of just those things—then perhaps the sum of Socrates and Plato can serve as a truthmaker for the conjunction. If one is a realist about sets—and sets exist “in the world” when their members do—then perhaps the set with Socrates and Plato as its members can serve as a truthmaker. But if we reject mereological universalism and set theoretic realism, then we will have to allow that the truthmaker relation takes a plural argument: Socrates and Plato together are truthmakers for the conjunction, but there is no single entity that is a truthmaker. In what follows, it will be simplest to speak as if, whenever a theory has truthmakers, it has a single entity as a truthmaker; but only minor emendations would be needed to allow for plural truthmaking. Some sentences, it is natural to think, have neither singular nor plural truthmakers (see Lewis 2001). For example, a negative existential sentence such as ‘There are no unicorns’ is made true, it seems, not by what exists, but by what fails to exist: it is true for lack of any falsemakers. And whether a (contingent) predication such as ‘the ball is red” is made true by the ball in question will depend on how the notion of sufficiency is understood (see  Supplement to §3.3).  Truthmaker maximalists hold that every truth (or at least every contingent truth) has a truthmaker. Typically, truthmaker maximalists will introduce states of affairs or facts to serve as the required truthmakers: totality states of affairs can serve as truthmakers for negative existentials (see Armstrong 2004: 72–5); the state of affairs of the ball's being red, not the red ball itself, is the truthmaker for ‘the ball is red’ (see Armstrong 1997: 115–6).  There is a danger here that truthmaking could be trivialized: could any true sentence S be said to have the state of affairs that S as its truthmaker? Typically, truthmaker maximalists avoid such trivialization by holding to a sparse theory of states of affairs. For example, a disjunctive sentence ‘S or T’ is not made true by a disjunctive state of affairs: there are none. Rather, the truthmakers for S (if any) and the truthmakers for T (if any) are separately truthmakers for the disjunction ‘S or T’. In any case, truthmaker maximalism is not required for the truthmaker approach to ontological commitment. What matters, rather, is that the truthmakers and the ontological commitments of a theory are aligned. How might a truthmaker criterion for ontological commitment be formulated? It will be useful to separately consider two versions, one for ontological commitment to particular entities, the other for ontological commitment to kinds: Truthmaker Criterion for Particulars: A theory T is ontologically committed to a particular a iff, necessarily, if T is true, then a is a truthmaker for T. Truthmaker Criterion for Kinds: A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff, necessarily, if T is true, then Ks are among the truthmakers for T. Note that in the criterion for particulars the necessity is de re. The particular a itself must be a truthmaker for T in any world where T is true. But in the criterion for kinds the necessity must be taken to be de dicto (with respect to ‘K’) if the criterion is to give the desired results. For example, ‘there are elephants’ is ontologically committed to elephants according to the criterion if some elephant or other is a truthmaker for ‘there are elephants’ in any world in which it is true, whether or not any actual elephant is a truthmaker in those worlds. How should we understand the truthmaking relation, and the way in which the existence of the truthmaker is sufficient for the truth of the theory? On the orthodox necessitation approach to truthmaking (Fox 1987; Bigelow 1988: 125; Armstrong 1997: 115; Lewis 2001), this sufficiency is analyzed in modal terms as follows: x is a truthmaker for T iff T is true and, necessarily, if x exists, then T is true. (A plural version replaces the singular variable ‘x’ with a plural variable ‘xx’ (read “the xs”).) This leads to a familiar problem when truthmakers are sought for necessary theories: any entity (or plurality of entities) is a truthmaker for any necessary theory on the analysis. And there is the familiar fix: replace modal entailment (in the analysis of truthmaking) with a more discriminating entailment relation, perhaps some sort of relevant entailment (Restall 1996). But for many truthmaker theorists, no entailment relation will be able to capture the idea that truthmakers must be fundamental entities, and must ground the theories they make true. This drives these truthmaker theorists to introduce a primitive grounding or in-virtue-of relation to characterize the truthmaking relation: x is a truthmaker for T iff T is true and, necessarily, Ts truth is grounded in x (or T is true in virtue of the existence of x) (see Schaffer 2010 and Cameron forthcoming).  Call this the grounding account of truthmaking.[30] According to truthmaker necessitarianism, the existence of the truthmaker necessitates the truth of the sentence: any possible world in which the truthmaker exists is a world in which the sentence is true. Truthmaker necessitarianism is automatic on the necessitation analysis of truthmaking. On a grounding account, truthmaker necessitarianism can be upheld by endorsing an axiomatic constraint on the notion of grounding: if an entity grounds the truth of a sentence, then, necessarily, if the entity exists, then the sentence is true. The problems to be discussed (in §3.3 and §3.4) apply to any truthmaker account of ontological commitment that endorses truthmaker necessitarianism.[31] The truthmaker criterion for ontological commitment to kinds, as formulated above, strengthens the modal entailment criterion (§2.2) since, necessarily, if Ks are among the truthmakers for T, then Ks exist. Thus, on a truthmaker account, for a theory to be ontologically committed to Ks, it is required not only that there exist Ks if the theory is true, but that there exist Ks that are truthmakers for the theory, if the theory is true. The chief reason given for the strengthening (Cameron 2008, 2010) is this: if the Ks are not fundamental entities, if they lack real existence, then a theory can entail that Ks exist without thereby incurring ontological commitment to Ks. For example, suppose one holds that, although it can truly be said that chairs exist, only (mereological) simples (or states of affairs involving those simples) are fundamental, or have real existence. Moreover, suppose that only entities that are fundamental, or have real existence, can play the truthmaking role, in line with the grounding account of truthmaking. Then, the (true) sentence ‘chairs exist’ is made true, not by chairs, but only by simples arranged chairwise. It then follows on the truthmaker account of ontological commitment that ‘chairs exist’ is committed only to simples arranged chairwise, not to chairs. And, arguably, this is the right result: chairs should not be counted among the ontological commitments of ‘chairs exist’ because, on the view being supposed, they do not add to the ontological cost of accepting ‘chairs exist’. In Armstrong's memorable phrase: they are “an ontological free lunch” (Armstrong 1997: 12–3).  This result cannot be had by the quantifier account or the entailment account because these accounts are both insensitive to the crucial distinction between existence and real existence. These accounts inevitably overgenerate commitments, thus ruling out by fiat a minimal ontology that accepts only simples. Much more would have to be said in a defense of the truthmaker account about the distinction between existence and real existence.[32] But let us suppose for what follows that the distinction is legitimate, and has the ontological significance attributed to it. Still, one might wonder whether we have just changed the subject. On the traditional notion of ontological commitment, as introduced by Quine, it is supposed to be trivially true that ‘Ks exist’ is ontologically committed to Ks (see §1.6.4). Instead of providing an account of a theory's ontological commitment as traditionally understood, the truthmaker account is an account of a theory's fundamental ontological commitments. Looked at in this way, the quantifier account and the truthmaker account are not in competition, and can live side by side (see Schaffer 2008). Even if the dispute is partly terminological, however, sometimes the choice of terminology matters. It is important to be clear on what the different notions of ontological commitment are, and how they fit in to the general project of ontology. Given a distinction between existence and real existence, the notion of ontological commitment bifurcates into two distinct notions, one shallow and one deep. On the shallow notion, entities that exist but do not really exist are to be counted among the ontological commitments of a theory: it is trivial or analytic that ‘Socrates exists’ is committed to Socrates, and that ‘elephants exist’ is committed to elephants, whether or not Socrates or elephants have real existence. On the deep notion, only entities that really exist count towards the theory's ontological commitments. Ontological commitment, arguably, has traditionally been given the shallow interpretation; but that is because, within the orthodox Quinean setting, there simply is no ontologically relevant distinction between existence and real existence. Once the distinction is accepted, however, and the project of ontology is construed to be the project of discovering not what there is, but what there really is, then it is only the deep notion of ontological commitment that resonates with the ontological  enterprise.[33]  It is an analysis of this deep notion, as given by the truthmaker  account, that matters for ontology. Just as there are shallow and deep notions of ontological commitment, so there are shallow and deep notions of truthmaking.  On the necessitation account of truthmaking, truthmaking is shallow: Socrates is a truthmaker for ‘Socrates exists’ and elephants are truthmakers for ‘elephants exist’, whether or not Socrates or elephants have real existence. On the grounding account of truthmaking, truthmaking is deep: only real existents can serve as truthmakers.  Clearly, if we pair a shallow interpretation of ontological commitment with a deep interpretation of truthmaking, then a truthmaker account of ontological commitment is off the table: the ontological commitments and the truthmakers of a theory will not be aligned.  In evaluating a truthmaker account, then, it must be supposed from the start that either both notions are taken to be shallow or both notions are taken to be deep. In what follows, both will be taken to be deep in accord with the truthmaker theorist's intentions. Let us begin an evaluation of the truthmaker account with a problem for the truthmaker criterion for ontological commitment to particulars: the problem of inessential predication. Consider the sentence ‘Socrates is wise’, and suppose that Socrates really exists. (If not, switch to an inessential predication whose subject is an entity that really exists.) Then it seems undeniable that ‘Socrates is wise’ is ontologically committed to Socrates. But, given truthmaker necessitarianism and the orthodox understanding of essential properties, Socrates will not be a truthmaker for ‘Socrates is wise’ on the truthmaker account. Wisdom, presumably, is not an essential property of Socrates; and so Socrates' mere existence does not necessitate his being wise. But, then, the truthmaker account of ontological commitment for particulars wrongly claims that ‘Socrates is wise’ is not ontologically committed to Socrates. Note that this problem doesn't arise for essential predications. Suppose, for example, that Socrates is essentially human. Then Socrates' mere existence necessitates his being human, and ‘Socrates is human’ has Socrates both as a truthmaker and as an ontological commitment. But pointing this out only seems to make matters worse for the truthmaker account: why should ‘Socrates is human’ but not ‘Socrates is wise’ be ontologically committed to Socrates? Essential and inessential predications should be treated on a par with respect to ontological commitment. An analog of the problem of inessential predication applies to the truthmaker criterion of ontological commitment to kinds. Consider the sentence ‘philosophers exist’, and suppose that philosophers really exist. Then it seems undeniable that ‘philosophers exist’ is ontologically committed to philosophers. Presumably, however, philosophers are not essentially philosophers. And so, given truthmaker necessitarianism, no philosopher is a truthmaker for ‘philosophers exist’: any philosopher is such that he or she could have existed in a philosopher-less world. The truthmaker criterion for kinds, then, wrongly claims that ‘philosophers exist’ is not ontologically committed to philosophers. Call this the problem of inessential generalization. Different accounts of truthmaking—of which entities are truthmakers, and what their essential properties are—will lead to different responses. Since adequate responses appear to be available to the truthmaker theorist, these responses are relegated to the supplementary document. The truthmaker account of ontological commitment—like the quantifier account, but for an entirely different reason—has a problem with capturing implicit commitment. The problem arises because the truthmakers for a theory, but not the ontological commitments of a theory, are entities whose existence is sufficient for the truth of the theory. The problem afflicts both the truthmaker criterion for particulars, and for kinds. Indeed, assuming truthmaker necessitarianism, it follows from the former criterion that a theory is ontologically committed to a particular only if the existence of the particular is both necessary and sufficient for the truth of the theory; it follows from the latter criterion that a theory is ontologically committed to a kind only if the existence of some members (or other) of the kind is both necessary and sufficient for the truth of the theory. But the examples of implicit commitment considered in §1.7.4 and §1.7.5 suggest that sufficiency is not required for ontological commitment. The truthmaker account, like the quantifier account, undergenerates commitments.[34] To illustrate the problem of sufficiency, consider the following examples. Suppose, as is standard, that the existence of a set necessitates the existence of any of its members. Then, intuitively, the sentence ‘{a, b} exists’ is implicitly committed to a, a result that is captured by entailment accounts of ontological commitment. But since the existence of a is not sufficient for the existence of {a, b}, a is not a truthmaker for ‘{a, b} exists’, and the truthmaker criterion for particulars fails to capture this commitment. For a second example, suppose that, necessarily, elephants have trunks, but that any trunk could exist without there existing any elephants. Then, intuitively, the sentence ‘elephants exist’ is ontologically committed, not only to elephants, but to elephants' trunks, a result that is captured by entailment accounts. But since trunks are not among the truthmakers for ‘elephants exist’, the truthmaker criterion for kinds fails to capture this commitment. For a final example, consider the sentence ‘bachelors exist’. Since it is analytic (suppose) that males exist if bachelors exist, this sentence, intuitively, is ontologically committed to males, a result that is captured by both quantifier and entailment accounts. But no male is a truthmaker for ‘bachelors exist’, since any male could exist without there existing any bachelors. So, again, the truthmaker criterion for kinds fails to capture an implicit commitment. How might a defender of the truthmaker account respond?[35] It won't do to claim that the notion of ontological commitment targeted by the truthmaker account doesn't include the missing implicit commitments.  For one thing, the truthmaker criterion will let in those implicit commitments that pass the sufficiency test, and there seems to be no principled reason for admitting these implicit commitments, but not the others. More importantly, excluding implicit commitments does not sit well with the chief motivation for a truthmaker account, viz., that ontological commitments should reflect fundamental ontology; for commitments are no less fundamental for being implicit. The mismatch between the notions of ontological commitment and truthmaking—that the ontological commitments of a theory are entities whose existence is necessary, given the truth of the theory, whereas the truthmakers of a theory are entities whose existence is sufficient for the truth of the theory—seems to be a serious problem for a truthmaker account of ontological commitment, at least as presented above. Perhaps the best response to the problem of sufficiency for a truthmaker theorist who wants to capture a deep notion of ontological commitment is to omit the requirement that the ontological commitments of a theory be truthmakers for that theory. It is enough that they are truthmakers for some theory or other, that is, that they are entities that really exist. This leads to the following criteria: Weakened Truthmaker Criterion for Particulars: A theory T is ontologically committed to a particular a iff T entails that a really exists. Weakened Truthmaker Criterion for Kinds: A theory T is ontologically committed to Ks iff T entails that Ks are among the entities that really exist.[36] But it is doubtful that this is properly called a truthmaker account of ontological commitment. The (deep) ontological commitments of a theory are no longer being analyzed in terms of the truthmaker commitments of the theory, but instead in terms of its fundamental commitments, its commitments to entities that really exist. And these, we have seen, are not the same.