 Although explicit discussion of ontological commitment postdates Frege's writings, an account of ontological commitment can be garnered from his defense of arithmetical platonism in The Foundations of Arithmetic (Frege 1884). That account is embedded in the following argument for the claim that numbers exist as “self-subsistent objects” (see Wright (1990), who calls the argument “deceptively simple”). The semantic role of singular terms (Frege's proper names) is to refer to objects. When singular terms occur in true sentences of an appropriate kind­—extensional sentences generally, and identity sentences in particular—they cannot help but to refer; for that is their contribution to the truth of the sentence. Appropriate sentences involving numerical singular terms are sometimes true; witness ‘the number of planets is nine’ and ‘1+1=2’. Therefore, these singular terms refer to objects. Moreover, the argument may be continued, since some of these singular terms—those of the form ‘the number of Fs’—figure in the identity condition definitive of the concept of number (Hume's Principle, see below), the objects referred to are properly called “numbers”. Therefore, numbers exist. This argument might be challenged in two different ways.  First, one might deny that sentences containing numerical singular terms are (literally) true; one might, for example, endorse a fictionalist account of mathematics (Field 1980). For our purposes, we can sidestep this objection and focus on the other premise of the argument, that extensional sentences containing numerical singular terms, if true, refer to numbers—which is to say, in other words, that such sentences, whether true or not, are ontologically committed to numbers. If this is to serve as a criterion of ontological commitment, there must be some purely syntactic way of determining which expressions are genuine singular terms; if genuine singular terms are characterized semantically—for example, as expressions that refer to objects when they occur in true extensional sentences—then the account of ontological commitment goes in a circle. Thus, Fregean accounts are committed to a syntactic priority thesis: ontology depends on ontological commitment plus truth; and ontological commitment in turn depends on syntax (see Wright 1983 for extended discussion). In various scattered remarks, Frege appears to endorse the syntactic priority thesis. For example, he writes (1884: §57): “we say ‘the [number] 1’, and by means of the definite article, set up 1 as an object”. And he notes that numerals occur, not only attributively, for example, in ‘Jupiter has four moons’, but also in identity statements, such as ‘the number of Jupiter's moons is four’; and the sense of such an identity statement is just that “the expression ‘the number of Jupiter's moons’ denotes the same object as the word ‘four’”. The difficulty of identifying the appropriate use of the definite article, or when ‘is’ signals a genuine identity statement, was, perhaps, not sufficiently appreciated by Frege. But recent work (especially Dummett (1973) and Hale (1996)) has given some reason to think that genuine singular terms in English can be recognized syntactically in terms of their inferential role. Suppose that the task of providing syntactic criteria for identifying genuine singular terms can be accomplished. Suppose, moreover, that there are syntactic criteria for saying when a genuine singular term purports to refer to objects of kind K.  Then the Fregean can put forth the following sufficient condition for ontological commitment: Fregean Account.  Suppose that t is a singular term purporting to refer to objects of kind K.  Then, any extensional theory containing the term t is ontologically committed to Ks. Note that, unlike the criteria for ontological commitment considered heretofore, this is intended only as a sufficient condition for ontological commitment. For one thing, just as Frege took singular terms to be a vehicle for commitment to objects, he took incomplete expressions to be a vehicle of commitment to concepts and (more generally) functions. Unlike Quine, Frege treated all meaningful expressions on a par with respect to ontological commitment. But even if we restrict our attention to ontological commitment to objects, there is no reason to think that Frege's criterion is necessary as well as sufficient. Frege could well have allowed existentially quantified sentences to be ontologically committed to objects, whether or not they were equivalent to disjunctions of sentences containing singular terms. In one important respect, Frege's approach to ontological commitment is in agreement with Quine's. Both hold that the smallest unit of ontological commitment is the complete sentence.  For Frege, this can be seen as an uncontroversial application of his famous Context Principle: “it is only in the context of a proposition that words have any meaning” (Frege 1884: §62). It follows that attribution of ontological commitment to persons always goes by way of the theories (sentences) that they accept. This approach to ontological commitment is common to all mainstream views in contemporary analytic philosophy. It could be denied, however, by a philosopher who holds that we stand in intentional relations, not only to propositions, but also to objects. For such a philosopher, plausibly, a person is ontologically committed to the objects of her thought, and the kinds they exemplify, independently of what propositions she takes to be true of those objects, or even whether there are any such propositions. The Fregean approach to ontological commitment differs from orthodox Quinean approaches most obviously in its emphasis on singular terms as opposed to quantifiers and variables. But this may reflect more a difference in their accounts of singular terms than a substantial difference in their accounts of ontological commitment; both approaches, after all, focus on the referential apparatus of the language. Quine eliminated all singular terms prior to assessing ontological commitment: definite descriptions were eliminated via Russell's theory of descriptions; names were eliminated in favor of predicates satisfied by at most one thing.  This allowed Quine to sidestep issues arising from ostensibly empty names (see §1.2 above). Frege, on the other hand, took singular terms to be the locus of commitment to objects. In Frege 1892, he writes: “when we say ‘the moon’ … we presuppose a reference”. Singular terms, then, are ontologically committing in this sense: they presuppose reference to objects. This applies no less to empty names that in fact fail to refer. Frege writes: anyone who seriously took the sentence [“Odysseus …”] to be true or false would ascribe to the name “Odysseus” a reference. This has a couple of awkward consequences. For one, it follows that denials of existence cannot be made with empty names: “Odysseus never existed” is neither true nor false. But perhaps these denials won't much be missed, since we can always say instead that the name ‘Odysseus’ doesn't refer. For another, sentences with fictional names are always ontologically committing. But, ultimately, it is the ontological commitment of persons that we care about, not sentences. A person may use a sentence containing a singular term—for example, an actor on the stage—without inheriting the sentence's ontological commitments. Only when a person judges the sentence to be true is she committed to an object as referent of the singular term, and to the kinds of entity to which the object belongs. Another difference between Frege and Quine (but not all Quineans) is that Frege's account of ontological commitment applies directly to sentences of ordinary language. Quine's account applies only indirectly to sentences of ordinary language via the method of paraphrase, or, in what seems to be his “official” view, not at all. This difference leads to different, and more onerous, demands being placed on the Fregean. As already noted, the Fregean must discover syntactic criteria for identifying genuine singular terms in ordinary language. Quine never engaged in the corresponding project: finding syntactic criteria for identifying objectual quantifiers in ordinary language. As we saw in §4.2, that task is none too easy, and there is substantial disagreement even over basic cases. But, contra Quine, it is a task that must be carried out if quantifier approaches to ontological commitment are to have philosophical application.  Philosophers, after all, do not often speak or write in Quine's target language: first-order predicate logic. Quinean approaches—if they are to provide a theory-neutral criterion of ontological commitment applicable to ordinary language—are no less beholden to the syntactic priority thesis than Fregean approaches. Thus far, we have canvassed Frege's argument that, if sentences containing numerical singular terms are true, then those terms refer to numbers. The last step in the argument—that the objects referred to by numerical singular terms satisfy the sortal concept of number—invoked the following identity criterion for numbers: Hume's Principle. The number of Fs is identical with the number of Gs if and only if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the Fs and the Gs. Frege considered, but rejected, the idea that Hume's Principle, by itself, could be taken to define the concept of number. His rejection was based on what has come to be known as the “Caesar Problem”: Hume's Principle allows one to decide whether the number of Fs is identical with q, when q is given in the form ‘the number of Gs’, but it fails to do so when q is not given in that form. Thus, Frege (1884: §56) requires that we be able to decide by means of our definitions whether any concept has the number Julius Caesar belonging to it, or whether that same familiar conqueror of Gaul is a number or not. Frege thus opted instead to define numbers explicitly in terms of extensions: the number of Fs = the extension of the concept ‘equal to the concept F’ (where F is equal to G just in case the Fs are in one-to-one correspondence with the Gs). These explicit definitions arguably allow Frege to maintain the logicist thesis that arithmetic is logic: they define numbers as logical objects in the sense that their existence can be justified on the basis of (Frege's) logic alone. But, as is well known, these explicit definitions foundered on the inconsistency of Frege's underlying theory of extensions, in particular, the naïve comprehension principle embodied in his Basic Law V. The Neo-Fregean seeks to defend arithmetical platonism and logicism by taking a different tack: Hume's Principle by itself is taken to provide a contextual definition of numbers.  The viability of this approach is secured by the result now called Frege's Theorem: Hume's Principle, when added to a suitable system of second-order logic, suffices for the proof of the basic laws of arithmetic, Peano's axioms (see Wright 1983: 158–69). Arithmetical logicism is secured if Hume's Principle can be shown to be analytic in an appropriate sense. Arithmetical platonism, with numbers as logical objects, is secured because, when logical truths are substituted for the right-hand side of Hume's Principle, the resulting instance on the left-hand side is also logically true, and explicitly refers to numbers. For our purposes, the main interest of the Neo-Fregean approach is that it leads to a conception of ontological commitment more liberal than any yet considered. This conception arises from the Neo-Fregean's particular way of understanding Hume's Principle. First, since Hume's Principle is to define the concept of number, the left- and right-hand sides of the principle must at least have the same truth conditions.  Second, sentences with the same truth conditions have the same ontological commitments. This second assumption amounts to a sense in which being supervenes on truth: circumstances cannot differ with respect to what there is without differing with respect to what is true. It follows from these two assumptions that the left- and right-hand sides of Hume's Principle have the same ontological commitments. But that still leaves open three different ways that Hume's Principle can be viewed (Wright 1990). First, one might reject it on the grounds that the left- and right-hand sides clearly do not have the same ontological commitments: the numerical identity on the left-hand side is committed to numbers; the claim that two concepts are equal on the right-hand side is not. On this view, only a conditionalized version of Hume's Principle could be accepted: “if there are numbers, then …” (Field 1984). In response, the neo-Fregean can say that this confuses “having the same truth conditions” with some more fine-grained equivalence such as “expressing the same thought”. Only the latter requires that both sides refer to the same objects, where reference is a kind of explicit ontological commitment.[45] A second response takes Hume's Principle to provide an ontological reduction of numbers to concepts, and relations between concepts. On this view, Hume's Principle is true, but ontological commitments should be read off of the right-hand side. Since the right-hand side, it is supposed, is not ontologically committed to numbers, the left-hand side—being truth-conditionally equivalent—cannot be ontologically committed to numbers either; surface grammar is deceptive here. This response is in line with the standard Quinean approach to paraphrase as a means of eliminating ontological commitment.  But, as noted in §4.2, it is unclear what justifies the asymmetric attitude with respect to commitment. Granted, there is no explicit ontological commitment to numbers by the right-hand side; but once one allows that ontological commitment can be implicit, it is unclear why one cannot say that it is the surface grammar of the right-hand side that is deceptive with respect to ontological commitment. The third response, that of the Neo-Fregean, is to say that ontological commitments should be read off of the left-hand side, and that therefore both sides are ontologically committed to numbers. This is no idle preference. It is backed up by the Fregean argument considered above that the left-hand side is ontologically committed to numbers in virtue of containing numerical singular terms. The symmetry is broken. The neo-Fregean thus endorses a sufficient condition for ontological commitment much weaker than the Fregean account: Neo-Fregean Account.  Suppose that t is a singular term purporting to refer to objects of kind K.  Then any theory truth-conditionally equivalent to a theory containing the term t is ontologically committed to Ks. To illustrate: “there are exactly as many forks as knives” is ontologically committed to numbers because it is truth-conditionally equivalent to “the number of forks is identical with the number of knives”, which contains a singular term ‘the number of forks’ which purports to refer to numbers. The liberality of the neo-Fregean account of ontological commitment is best appreciated by considering its application to abstraction principles for which, unlike Hume's Principle, the right-hand side appears to be entirely about concrete entities, and so appears to be acceptable to a nominalist. For example, consider the abstraction principle for directions: the direction of line a is identical to the direction of line b if and only if a is parallel to b (where a and b are concrete). According to the neo-Fregean account, the claim that concrete lines a and b are parallel is committed, by itself, to abstract objects, directions.[46] Moreover, it has this commitment whether or not any mind ever grasps the concept of direction, or formulates the corresponding abstraction principle. In general, commitments to abstracta are concomitant with certain commitments to concreta, and inseparable from them, regardless of our ways of conceptualizing.[47]