 As so much of the debate concerning others in the heyday of its discussion in analytic philosophy in the twentieth century can be read as a reaction to Mill’s formulation of the argument from analogy, it is instructive to consider the context for Mill’s work  here.[16]  In proposing his argument, Mill was responding to a challenge laid down by the eighteenth century philosopher Thomas Reid who argued that Descartes’ philosophy, when traced through the work of philosophers such as Malebranche, Locke, Hume and Berkeley, leads to solipsism. In order to avoid this conclusion, Reid argued that philosophers must jettison the Cartesian framework of ideas and its trust in reason over the deliverances of sense. According to Reid, the faculties of reason and perception should be regarded as being on an equal footing. Rather than insist that all human belief is regulated by reason, Reid holds that we should allow that our perceptions of the world are guided by principles for which no proof can be offered. Amongst the regulative principles Reid identifies there are two concerning others: (i) there is life and intelligence in our fellow men; and (ii) certain features of the countenance, sounds of the voice and gestures of the body indicate certain thoughts and dispositions of mind (Reid 1785). Mill’s work is designed as a defense of the Cartesian framework in response to Reid’s claim that it leads inexorably to solipsism. According to Mill, all truths are known in one of two ways: either directly, through the authority of consciousness, or indirectly, by inference from truths known directly. Mill believes that knowledge arrived indirectly in this way is sufficient to avoid the concern of solipsism. While there is little direct discussion of this question in Descartes’ work, one can find passages devoted to it in post-Cartesian philosophy. Malebranche, for example, differentiates knowledge of one’s own mind, of bodies, and of other men’s mind: the first is through consciousness, the second through ideas, and the third through conjecture (1674–5 [1980: 239]). In the case of another man’s sensations, Malebranche first considers the possibility that everyone has the same sensations when confronted with the same objects, but then notes that it can happen that “the internal fibers of the optic nerve do not produce the same sensation for different people” (Ibid, 66). Despite this possibility, Malebranche thinks there is reason to believe that God arranged things so that the same physical conditions do produce the same sensations (i.e., that nature is uniform). Nonetheless, he argues that we cannot know another’s sensations as there is “a great deal of diversity in different people’s organs of sight as well as of hearing and taste” (ibid). Writing in response to Malebranche, Arnauld (1683) insists that we do know other men’s minds through ideas: we have ideas of their bodies and must reason from these to the conclusion that they have minds. In Arnauld’s work we have, arguably, an early formulation of the argument from analogy. The threat of solipsism is a very particular one for the idealism of George Berkeley. Without proof of other minds, idealism will amount to nothing but solipsism. Berkeley admits that I cannot have immediate evidence of the mind of another; what he holds is that there is “a certain collection of ideas, as directs us to think there is a distinct principle of thought and motion like until ourselves, accompanying and represented by it” (Berkeley 1710: Principle 148). While some find in Berkeley’s work another early formulation of the argument from analogy (Urmson 1982), others argue that his work should be read as putting forwards a causal argument: in the case of God, I reason that He is the cause or Author of everything in nature that I see around me; in the case of other finite spirits, I reason that they are the cause of the movements in the bodies I observe and the words that I hear (Bennett 1971 and Falkenstein 1990). Some philosophers find an argument from analogy also in the work of David Hume, while others interpret his work in a more naturalistic vein. One thing that cannot be denied is that Hume introduces an important element into the discussion of others when he writes in The Treatise, “No quality of human nature is more remarkable, both in itself and in its consequences, than that propensity we have to sympathize with others” (1738–40 [1888: 316]). It is by means of sympathy that we are affected by the passions and mental states of others, which otherwise “remain concealed in the minds of others” (ibid, 593). Precisely how this remarkable capacity operates is a matter of some debate. There are those who agree with Reid and find Hume unable to escape the confines of his own mind. These philosophers argue that Hume recognizes the problem of other minds that arises for the Cartesian framework that he endorses, and holds that sympathy can do no more than get us to feel our own feelings in response to what we observe in the other. But there are others who take Hume to turn his back on scepticism and the very business of providing reasons for the belief that others have thoughts and feelings. They read Hume’s work as giving us a psychological account of how it is that we are able to understand the thoughts and feelings of our fellow men through the operation of sympathy (Greco 2012; see also Waldow 2009). Hume’s understanding of the working of sympathy was challenged by his contemporary Adam Smith. Smith rejects the idea that I can feel what another feels. He writes, Though our brother is upon the rack, as long as we ourselves are at our ease, our senses will never inform us of what he suffers. They never did, and never can, carry us beyond our own person, and it is by the imagination only that we can form any conception of what are his sensations…. A little later he writes, That this is the source of our fellow-feeling for the misery of others, that it is by changing places in fancy with the sufferer, that we come either to conceive or to be affected by what he feels, may be demonstrated by many obvious observations, if it should not be thought sufficiently evident of itself. (1759: I.i.i.2–3) With Smith’s work we take a step closer to the work of the simulation theorists of more recent times (cf.  §3.1). It is Reid’s contention that, so long as one is working within a Cartesian framework of ideas, our relations to others must be a taken to be a matter of probability, hypothesis, or conjecture, and this he takes to be at odds with the conviction with which, for example, the child interacts with her nurse. While the Cartesian recognizes only the solitary operations of mind, Reid proposes that we also recognize the social operations of mind (Reid 1785 [1969: 71]). There has been an inclination in philosophy to find a difficulty accounting for our relations to others to have its roots in the writings of Descartes. If there is some truth to this accusation, one may expect to find the ‘problem of other minds’ less pressing in the work of pre-Cartesian philosophy. With the possible exception of Augustine (whose work is taken by some to be a pre-cursor to Descartes’), this is arguably the case. While philosophers in ancient Greece raise sceptical questions concerning others, it is has been suggested that the problems they raise tend to be ‘thin’ rather than ‘thick’ ones (see  §1  and Avramides 2001). Plato and Aristotle, for example, discuss the value of friendship, but do not ask why we should think others exist to be friends. Sorabji claims that “it never occurs to Aristotle to raise doubts about other minds” (1974: 88). According to Sextus Empiricus, sceptics of the Cyrenaic school raise problems about the minds of others, but it is not clear that the problem they raise goes beyond the ‘thin’ one, How can I know what another thinks and feels? (Tsouna  1998a).[17] While philosophers in the West trace their lineage back to ancient Greece, it is worth remembering that philosophical ideas were also being discussed elsewhere in the world. One tradition that has a long history of concern with issues to do with the minds of others is the Indian Buddhist tradition. While one should not read texts from other philosophical traditions only to find parallels with one’s own, it is striking that these early Buddhist philosophers may be thought to have grappled with many of the same issues concerning others as have philosophers in the Western tradition. It is possible to find discussion of both epistemological and conceptual problems in connection with others in Buddhist texts. There are two important works in this tradition devoted to questions concerning others, one by Dharmakīrti in the seventh century and another by Ratnakirti in the 11th. Indeed, Sharma (1985) writes that “Dharmakīrti is perhaps the first ever thinker to make a systematic attempt to come to grips with this problem [of other minds]”. Dharmakīrti is an idealist who denies the reality of the external world and whose work, therefore, is open to the charge of solipsism. In his Proof of the Existence of Other Streams of Consciousness, Dharmakīrti first points out that the mind of another is imperceptible; he then goes on to argue that other minds are inferred from observed speech and action. Dharmakīrti is careful to acknowledge that there are limits to our understanding of others (we cannot know what it is like for them) (Inami 2001). Ganeri (2012) suggests that what we find in Dharmakīrti’s text is “a sort of argument from analogy” for the existence of others. Responding to Dharmakīrti here, Ratnakirti points out the difficulties in reasoning to the mind of another that one can never be in a position to verify. In effect, Ratnakirti argues that other minds cannot be taken to exist, and solipsism must be accepted. However, Ratnakirti is careful to draw a distinction between conventional and ultimate existence—while other minds do not exist ultimately, they do exist conventionally. It is this conventional existence that explains our actions with regards to others. According to Ganeri, we can also find in Ratnakirti’s work arguments to show that it is not possible even to form a conception of another mind (2012: 203). This problem is particularly pressing for the Buddhist philosopher for, as Ganeri reminds us (2012: 202), without a conception of others it is a question how can one cultivate compassion.