 In recent years, subdisciplines of the philosophy of mathematics have started to arise. They evolve in a way that is not completely determined by the “big debates” about the nature of mathematics. In this section, we look at a few of these disciplines. Many regard set theory as in some sense the foundation of mathematics. It seems that just about any piece of mathematics can be carried out in set theory, even though it is sometimes an awkward setting for doing so. In recent years, the philosophy of set theory is emerging as a philosophical discipline of its own. This is not to say that in specific debates in the philosophy of set theory it cannot make an enormous difference whether one approaches it from a formalistic point of view or from a platonistic point of view, for instance. The thesis that set theory is most suitable for serving as the foundations of mathematics is by no means uncontroversial. Over the past decades, category theory has presented itself as a rival for this role. Category theory is a mathematical theory that was developed in the middle of the twentieth century. Unlike in set theory, in category theory mathematical objects are only defined up to isomorphism. This means that Benacerraf’s identification problem cannot be raised for category theoretical concepts and ‘objects’. At the same time, (roughly) everything that can be done in set theory can be done in category theory (but not always in a natural manner), and vice versa (again not always in a natural manner). This means that for a structuralist perspective, category theory is an attractive candidate for providing the foundations of mathematics (McLarty 2004). One question that has been important from the beginning of set theory concerns the difference between sets and proper classes. (This question has a natural counterpart for category theory: the difference between small and large categories.) Cantor’s diagonal argument forces us to recognize that the set-theoretical universe as a whole cannot be regarded as a set. Cantor’s Theorem shows that the power set (i.e., the set of all subsets) of any given set has a larger cardinality than the given set itself. Now suppose that the set-theoretical universe forms a set: the set of all sets. Then the power set of the set of all sets would have to be a subset of the set of all sets. This would contradict the fact that the power set of the set of all sets would have a larger cardinality than the set of all sets. So we must conclude that the set-theoretical universe cannot form a set. Cantor called pluralities that are too large to be considered as a set inconsistent multiplicities (Cantor 1932). Today, Cantor’s inconsistent multiplicities are called proper classes. Some philosophers of mathematics hold that proper classes still constitute unities, and hence can be seen as a sort of collection. They are, in a Cantorian spirit, just collections that are too large to be sets. Nevertheless, there are problems with this view. Just as there can be no set of all sets, there can for diagonalization reasons also not be a proper class of all proper classes. So the proper class view seems compelled to recognize in addition a realm of super-proper classes, and so on. For this reason, Zermelo claimed that proper classes simply do not exist. This position is less strange than it looks at first sight. On close inspection, one sees that in ZFC one never needs to quantify over entities that are too large to be sets (although there exist systems of set theory that do quantify over proper classes). On this view, the set-theoretical universe is potentially infinite in an absolute sense of the word. It never exists as a completed whole, but is forever growing, and hence forever unfinished (Zermelo 1930). This way of speaking indicates that in our attempts to understand this notion of potential infinity, we are drawn to temporal metaphors. It is not surprising that these temporal metaphors cause some philosophers of mathematics acute discomfort. A second subject in the philosophy of set theory concerns the justification of the accepted basic principles of mathematics, i.e., the axioms of ZFC. An important historical case study is the process by which the Axiom of Choice came to be accepted by the mathematical community in the early decades of the twentieth century (Moore 1982). The importance of this case study is largely due to the fact that an open and explicit discussion of its acceptability was held in the mathematical community. In this discussion, general reasons for accepting or refusing to accept a principle as a basic axiom came to the surface. On the systematic side, two conceptions of the notion of set have been elaborated which aim to justify all axioms of ZFC in one fell swoop. On the one hand, there is the iterative conception of sets, which describes how the set-theoretical universe can be thought of as generated from the empty set by means of the power set operation (Boolos 1971, Linnebo 2013). On the other hand, there is the limitation of size conception of sets, which states that every collection which is not too big to be a set, is a set (Hallett 1984). The iterative conception motivates some axioms of ZFC very well (the power set axiom, for instance), but fares less well with respect to other axioms, such as the replacement axiom (Potter 2004, Part IV). The limitation of size conception motivates other axioms better (such as the restricted comprehension axiom). It seems fair to say that there is no uniform conception that clearly justifies all axioms of ZFC. The motivation of putative axioms that go beyond ZFC constitutes a third concern of the philosophy of set theory (Maddy 1988; Martin 1998). One such class of principles is constituted by the large cardinal axioms. Nowadays, large cardinal hypotheses are really taken to mean some kind of embedding properties between the set theoretic universe and inner models of set theory. Most of the time, large cardinal principles entail the existence of sets that are larger than any sets which can be guaranteed by ZFC to exist. The weaker of the large cardinal principles are supported by intrinsic evidence (see  section 3.1).  They follow from what are called reflection principles. These are principles that state that the set theoretic universe as a whole is so rich that it is very similar to some set-sized initial segment of it. The stronger of the large cardinal principles hitherto only enjoy extrinsic support. Many researchers are skeptical about the possibility that reflection principles, for instance, can be found that support them (Koellner 2009); others, however, disagree (Welch & Horsten 2016). Gödel hoped that on the basis of such large cardinal axioms, the most important open question of set theory could eventually be settled. This is the continuum problem. The continuum hypothesis was proposed by Cantor in the late nineteenth century. It states that there are no sets S which are too large for there to be a one-to-one correspondence between S and the natural numbers, but too small for there to exist a one-to-one correspondence between S and the real numbers. Despite strenuous efforts, all attempts to settle the continuum problem failed. Gödel came to suspect that the continuum hypothesis is independent of the accepted principles of set theory (ZFC). Around 1940, he managed to show that the continuum hypothesis is consistent with ZFC. A few decades later, Paul Cohen proved that the negation of the continuum hypothesis is also consistent with ZFC. Thus Gödel’s conjecture of the independence of the continuum hypothesis was eventually confirmed. But Gödel’s hope that large cardinal axioms could solve the continuum problem turned out to be unfounded. The continuum hypothesis is independent of ZFC even in the context of large cardinal axioms. Nevertheless, large cardinal principles have manage to settle restricted versions of the continuum hypothesis (in the affirmative). The existence of so-called Woodin cardinals ensures that sets definable in analysis are either countable or the size of the continuum. Thus the definable continuum problem is settled. In recent years, attempts have been focused on finding principles of a different kind which might be justifiable and which might yet decide the continuum hypothesis (Woodin 2001a, Woodin 2001b). One of the more general philosophical questions that have emerged from this research is the following: which conditions have to be satisfied in order for a principle to be a putative basic axiom of mathematics? Some of the researchers who seek to decide the continuum hypothesis think that it is true; others think that it is false. But there are also many set theorists and philosophers of mathematics who believe that the continuum hypothesis not just undecidable in ZFC but absolutely undecidable, i.e. that it is neither provable (in the informal sense of the word) nor disprovable (in the informal sense of the word) because it is neither true nor false. If the mathematical universe is a set theoretic multiverse, for instance, then there are equally models that make the continuum hypothesis true and equally good models that make it false, and there is no more to be said (Hamkins, 2015). In the second half of the nineteenth century Dedekind proved that the basic axioms of arithmetic have, up to isomorphism, exactly one model, and that the same holds for the basic axioms of Real Analysis. If a theory has, up to isomorphism, exactly one model, then it is said to be categorical. So modulo isomorphisms, arithmetic and analysis each have exactly one intended model. Half a century later Zermelo proved that the principles of set theory are “almost” categorical or quasi-categorical: for any two models \(M_1\) and \(M_2\) of the principles of set theory, either \(M_1\) is isomorphic to \(M_2\), or \(M_1\) is isomorphic to a strongly inaccessible rank of \(M_2\), or \(M_2\) is isomorphic to a strongly inaccessible rank of \(M_1\) (Zermelo 1930). In recent years, attempts have been made to develop arguments to the effect that Zermelo’s conclusion can be strengthened to a full categoricity assertion (McGee 1997; Martin 2001), but we will not discuss these arguments here. At the same time, the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem says that every first-order formal theory that has at least one model with an infinite domain, must have models with domains of all infinite cardinalities. Since the principles of arithmetic, analysis and set theory had better possess at least one infinite model, the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem appears to apply to them. Is this not in tension with Dedekind’s categoricity theorems? The solution of this conundrum lies in the fact that Dedekind did not even implicitly work with first-order formalizations of the basic principles of arithmetic and analysis. Instead, he informally worked with second-order formalizations. Let us focus on arithmetic to see what this amounts to. The basic postulates of arithmetic contain the induction axiom. In first-order formalizations of arithmetic, this is formulated as a scheme: for each first-order arithmetical formula of the language of arithmetic with one free variable, one instance of the induction principle is included in the formalization of arithmetic. Elementary cardinality considerations reveal that there are infinitely many properties of natural numbers that are not expressed by a first-order formula. But intuitively, it seems that the induction principle holds for all properties of natural numbers. So in a first-order language, the full force of the principle of mathematical induction cannot be expressed. For this reason, a number of philosophers of mathematics insist that the postulates of arithmetic should be formulated in a second-order language (Shapiro 1991). Second-order languages contain not just first-order quantifiers that range over elements of the domain, but also second-order quantifiers that range over properties (or subsets) of the domain. In full second-order logic, it is insisted that these second-order quantifiers range over all subsets of the domain. If the principles of arithmetic are formulated in a second-order language, then Dedekind’s argument goes through and we have a categorical theory. For similar reasons, we also obtain a categorical theory if we formulate the basic principles of real analysis in a second-order language, and the second-order formulation of set theory turns out to be quasi-categorical. Ante rem structuralism, as well as the modal nominalist structuralist interpretation of mathematics, could benefit from a second-order formulation. If the ante rem structuralist wants to insists that the natural number structure is fixed up to isomorphism by the Peano axioms, then she will want to formulate the Peano axioms in second-order logic. And the modal nominalist structuralist will want to insist that the relevant concrete systems for arithmetic are those that make the second-order Peano axioms true (Hellman 1989). Similarly for real analysis and set theory. Thus the appeal to second-order logic appears as the final step in the structuralist project of isolating the intended models of mathematics. Yet appeal to second-order logic in the philosophy of mathematics is by no means uncontroversial. A first objection is that the ontological commitment of second-order logic is higher than the ontological commitment of first-order logic. After all, use of second-order logic seems to commit us to the existence of abstract objects: classes. In response to this problem, Boolos has articulated an interpretation of second-order logic which avoids this commitment to abstract entities (Boolos 1985). His interpretation spells out the truth clauses for the second-order quantifiers in terms of plural expressions, without invoking classes. For instance, an second-order expression of the form \(\exists x F(x)\) is interpreted as: “there are some (first-order objects) \(x\) such that they have the property \(F\)”. This interpretation is called the plural interpretation of second-order logic. It is controversial whether there is a real difference between the mathematical use of pluralities and of sets (Linnebo 2003). Nevertheless it is clear that an appeal to the plural interpretation of second-order logic will be tempting for nominalist versions of structuralism. A second objection against second-order logic can be traced back to Quine (Quine 1970). This objection states that the interpretation of full second-order logic is connected with set-theoretical questions. This is already indicated by the fact that most regimentations of second-order logic adopt a version of the axiom of choice as one of its axioms. But more worrisome is the fact that second-order logic is inextricably intertwined with deep problems in set theory, such as the continuum hypothesis. For theories such as arithmetic that intend to describe an infinite collection of objects, even a matter as elementary as the question of the cardinality of the range of the second-order quantifiers, is equivalent to the continuum problem. Also, it turns out that there exists a sentence which is a second-order logical truth if and only if the continuum hypothesis holds (Boolos 1975). We have seen that the continuum problem is independent of the currently accepted principles of set theory. And many researchers believe it to be absolutely truth-valueless. If this is so, then there is an inherent indeterminacy in the very notion of second-order infinite model. And many contemporary philosophers of mathematics take the latter not to have a determinate truth value. Thus, it is argued, the very notion of an (infinite) model of full second-order logic is inherently indeterminate. If one does not want to appeal to full second-order logic, then there are other ways to ensure categoricity of mathematical theories. One idea would be to make use of quantifiers which are somehow intermediate between first-order and second-order quantifiers. For instance, one might treat “there are finitely many \(x\)” as a primitive quantifier. This will allow one to, for instance, construct a categorical axiomatization of arithmetic. But ensuring categoricity of mathematical theories does not require introducing stronger quantifiers. Another option would be to take the informal concept of algorithmic computability as a primitive notion (Halbach & Horsten 2005; Horsten 2012). A theorem of Tennenbaum states that all first-order models of Peano Arithmetic in which addition and multiplication are computable functions, are isomorphic to each other. Now our operations of addition and multiplication are computable: otherwise we could never have learned these operations. This, then, is another way in which we may be able to isolate the intended models of our principles of arithmetic. Against this account, however, it may be pointed out that it seems that the categoricity of intended models for real analysis, for instance, cannot be ensured in this manner. For computation on models of the principles of real analysis, we do not have a theorem that plays the role of Tennenbaum’s theorem. If one accepts a certain open-endedness of the collection of arithmetical predicates, then a categoricity theorem of sorts for arithmetic can be obtained without overstepping the bounds of first-order logic and without appealing to an informal concept of computability. Suppose that there are two mathematicians, A and B, who both assert the first-order Peano-axioms in their own idiolect. Suppose furthermore that A and B regard the collection of predicates for which mathematical induction is permissible as open-ended, and are both willing to accept the other’s induction scheme as true. Then A and B have the wherewithal to convince themselves that both idiolects describe isomorphic structures (Parsons 1990b). Until fairly recently, the subject of computation did not receive much attention in the philosophy of mathematics. This may be due in part to the fact that in Hilbert-style axiomatizations of number theory, computation is reduced to proof in Peano Arithmetic. But this situation has changed in recent years. It seems that along with the increased importance of computation in mathematical practice, philosophical reflections on the notion of computation will occupy a more prominent place in the philosophy of mathematics in the years to come. Church’s Thesis occupies a central place in computability theory. It says that every algorithmically computable function on the natural numbers can be computed by a Turing machine. As a principle, Church’s Thesis has a somewhat curious status. It appears to be a basic principle. On the one hand, the principle is almost universally held to be true. On the other hand, it is hard to see how it can be mathematically proved. The reason is that its antecedent contains an informal notion (algorithmic computability) whereas its consequent contains a purely mathematical notion (Turing machine computability). Mathematical proofs can only connect purely mathematical notions—or so it seems. The received view was that our evidence for Church’s Thesis is quasi-empirical. Attempts to find convincing counterexamples to Church’s Thesis have come to naught. Independently, various proposals have been made to mathematically capture the algorithmically computable functions on the natural numbers. Instead of Turing machine computability, the notions of general recursiveness, Herbrand-Gödel computability, lambda-definability… have been proposed. But these mathematical notions all turn out to be equivalent. Thus, to use Gödelian terminology, we have accumulated extrinsic evidence for the truth of Church’s Thesis. Kreisel pointed out long ago that even if a thesis cannot be formally proved, it may still be possible to obtain intrinsic evidence for it from a rigorous but informal analysis of intuitive notions (Kreisel 1967). Kreisel calls these exercises in informal rigour. Detailed scholarship by Sieg revealed that the seminal article (Turing 1936) constitutes an exquisite example of just this sort of analysis of the intuitive concept of algorithmic computability (Sieg 1994). Currently, the most active subjects of investigation in the domain of foundations and philosophy of computation appear to be the following. First, energy has been invested in developing theories of algorithmic computation on structures other than the natural numbers. In particular, efforts have been made to obtain analogues of Church’s Thesis for algorithmic computation on various structures. In this context, substantial progress has been made in recent decades in developing a theory of effective computation on the real numbers (Pour-El 1999). Second, attempts have been made to explicate notions of computability other than algorithmic computability by humans. One area of particular interest here is the area of quantum computation (Deutsch et al. 2000). We know much about the concepts of formal proof and formal provability, their connection with algorithmic computability, and the principles by which these concepts are governed. We know, for instance, that the proofs of a formal system are computably enumerable, and that provability in a sound (strong enough) formal system is subject to Gödel’s incompleteness theorems. But a mathematical proof as you find it in a mathematical journal is not a formal proof in the sense of the logicians: it is a (rigorous) informal proof (Myhill 1960, Detlefsen 1992). We know much less about the concepts of informal proof and informal provability and the laws governing them than we know about formal proof and provability. In particular, despite the fact that the question has been debated since the early 1960s (Lucas 1961), it is still completely unclear whether the extension of informal mathematical provability coincides, for some formal theory T, with the extension of provability in T, or whether the concept of informal mathematical provability is even clear enough for this question to have a definite answer (Horsten & Welch 2016). The past decades have witnessed the first occurrences of mathematical proofs in which computers appear to play an essential role. The four-colour theorem is one example. It says that for every map, only four colours are needed to colour countries in such a way that no two countries that have a common border receive the same color. This theorem was proved in 1976 (Appel et al. 1977). But the proof distinguishes many cases which were verified by a computer. These computer verifications are too long to be double-checked by humans. The proof of the four colour theorem gave rise to a debate about the question to what extent computer-assisted proofs count as proofs in the true sense of the word. The received view has it that mathematical proofs yield a priori knowledge. Yet when we rely on a computer to generate part of a proof, we appear to rely on the proper functioning of computer hardware and on the correctness of a computer program. These appear to be empirical factors. Thus one is tempted to conclude that computer proofs yield quasi-empirical knowledge (Tymoczko 1979). In other words, through the advent of computer proofs the notion of proof has lost its purely a priori character. Others hold that the empirical factors on which we rely when we accept computer proofs do not appear as premises in the argument. Hence, computer proofs can yield a priori knowledge after all (Burge 1998).