 In the years before the second world war it became clear that weighty objections had been raised against each of the three anti-platonist programs in the philosophy of mathematics. Predicativism was perhaps an exception, but it was at the time a program without defenders. Thus room was created for a renewed interest in the prospects of platonistic views about the nature of mathematics. On the platonistic conception, the subject matter of mathematics consists of abstract entities. Gödel was a platonist with respect to mathematical objects and with respect to mathematical concepts (Gödel 1944; Gödel 1964). But his platonistic view was more sophisticated than that of the mathematician in the street. Gödel held that there is a strong parallelism between plausible theories of mathematical objects and concepts on the one hand, and plausible theories of physical objects and properties on the other hand. Like physical objects and properties, mathematical objects and concepts are not constructed by humans. Like physical objects and properties, mathematical objects and concepts are not reducible to mental entities. Mathematical objects and concepts are as objective as physical objects and properties. Mathematical objects and concepts are, like physical objects and properties, postulated in order to obtain a good satisfactory theory of our experience. Indeed, in a way that is analogous to our perceptual relation to physical objects and properties, through mathematical intuition we stand in a quasi-perceptual relation with mathematical objects and concepts. Our perception of physical objects and concepts is fallible and can be corrected. In the same way, mathematical intuition is not fool-proof — as the history of Frege’s Basic Law V shows— but it can be trained and improved. Unlike physical objects and properties, mathematical objects do not exist in space and time, and mathematical concepts are not instantiated in space or time. Our mathematical intuition provides intrinsic evidence for mathematical principles. Virtually all of our mathematical knowledge can be deduced from the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the Axiom of Choice (ZFC). In Gödel’s view, we have compelling intrinsic evidence for the truth of these axioms. But he also worried that mathematical intuition might not be strong enough to provide compelling evidence for axioms that significantly exceed the strength of ZFC. Aside from intrinsic evidence, it is in Gödel’s view also possible to obtain extrinsic evidence for mathematical principles. If mathematical principles are successful, then, even if we are unable to obtain intuitive evidence for them, they may be regarded as probably true. Gödel says that “success here means fruitfulness in consequences, particularly in “verifiable” consequences, i.e. consequences verifiable without the new axiom, whose proof with the help of the new axiom, however, are considerably simpler and easier to discover, and which make it possible to contract into one proof many different proofs […] There might exist axioms so abundant in their verifiable consequences, shedding so much light on a whole field, yielding such powerful methods for solving problems […] that, no matter whether or not they are intrinsically necessary, they would have to be accepted at least in the same sense as any well-established physical theory” (Gödel 1947, p. 477). This inspired Gödel to search for new axioms which can be extrinsically motivated and which can decide questions such as the continuum hypothesis which are highly independent of ZFC (cf.  section 5.1). Gödel shared Hilbert’s conviction that all mathematical questions have definite answers. But platonism in the philosophy of mathematics should not be taken to be ipso facto committed to holding that all set-theoretical propositions have determinate truth values. There are versions of platonism that maintain, for instance, that all theorems of ZFC are made true by determinate set-theoretical facts, but that there are no set-theoretical facts that make certain statements that are highly independent of ZFC truth-determinate. It seems that the famous set theorist Paul Cohen held some such view (Cohen 1971). Quine formulated a methodological critique of traditional philosophy. He suggested a different philosophical methodology instead, which has become known as naturalism (Quine 1969). According to naturalism, our best theories are our best scientific theories. If we want to obtain the best available answer to philosophical questions such as What do we know? and Which kinds of entities exist?, we should not appeal to traditional epistemological and metaphysical theories. We should also refrain from embarking on a fundamental epistemological or metaphysical inquiry starting from first principles. Rather, we should consult and analyze our best scientific theories. They contain, albeit often implicitly, our currently best account of what exists, what we know, and how we know it. Putnam applied Quine’s naturalistic stance to mathematical ontology (Putnam 1972). At least since Galilei, our best theories from the natural sciences are mathematically expressed. Newton’s theory of gravitation, for instance, relies heavily on the classical theory of the real numbers. Thus an ontological commitment to mathematical entities seems inherent to our best scientific theories. This line of reasoning can be strengthened by appealing to the Quinean thesis of confirmational holism. Empirical evidence does not bestow its confirmatory power on any one individual hypothesis. Rather, experience globally confirms the theory in which the individual hypothesis is embedded. Since mathematical theories are part and parcel of scientific theories, they too are confirmed by experience. Thus, we have empirical confirmation for mathematical theories. Even more appears true. It seems that mathematics is indispensable to our best scientific theories: it is not at all obvious how we could express them without using mathematical vocabulary. Hence the naturalist stance commands us to accept mathematical entities as part of our philosophical ontology. This line of argumentation is called an indispensability argument (Colyvan 2001). If we take the mathematics that is involved in our best scientific theories at face value, then we appear to be committed to a form of platonism. But it is a more modest form of platonism than Gödel’s platonism. For it appears that the natural sciences can get by with (roughly) function spaces on the real numbers. The higher regions of transfinite set theory appear to be largely irrelevant to even our most advanced theories in the natural sciences. Nevertheless, Quine thought (at some point) that the sets that are postulated by ZFC are acceptable from a naturalistic point of view; they can be regarded as a generous rounding off of the mathematics that is involved in our scientific theories. Quine’s judgement on this matter is not universally accepted. Feferman, for instance, argues that all the mathematical theories that are essentially used in our currently best scientific theories are predicatively reducible (Feferman 2005). Maddy even argues that naturalism in the philosophy of mathematics is perfectly compatible with a non-realist view about sets (Maddy 2007, part IV). In Quine’s philosophy, the natural sciences are the ultimate arbiters concerning mathematical existence and mathematical truth. This has led Charles Parsons to object that this picture makes the obviousness of elementary mathematics somewhat mysterious (Parsons 1980). For instance, the question whether every natural number has a successor ultimately depends, in Quine’s view, on our best empirical theories; however, somehow this fact appears more immediate than that. In a kindred spirit, Maddy notes that mathematicians do not take themselves to be in any way restricted in their activity by the natural sciences. Indeed, one might wonder whether mathematics should not be regarded as a science in its own right, and whether the ontological commitments of mathematics should not be judged rather on the basis of the rational methods that are implicit in mathematical practice. Motivated by these considerations, Maddy set out to inquire into the standards of existence implicit in mathematical practice, and into the implicit ontological commitments of mathematics that follow from these standards (Maddy 1990). She focussed on set theory, and on the methodological considerations that are brought to bear by the mathematical community on the question which large cardinal axioms can be taken to be true. Thus her view is closer to that of Gödel than to that of Quine. In more recent work, she isolates two maxims that seem to be guiding set theorists when contemplating the acceptability of new set theoretic principles: unify and maximize (Maddy 1997). The maxim “unify” is an instigation for set theory to provide a single system in which all mathematical objects and structures of mathematics can be instantiated or modelled. The maxim “maximize” means that set theory should adopt set theoretic principles that are as powerful and mathematically fruitful as possible. Bernays observed that when a mathematician is at work she “naively” treats the objects she is dealing with in a platonistic way. Every working mathematician, he says, is a platonist (Bernays 1935). But when the mathematician is caught off duty by a philosopher who quizzes her about her ontological commitments, she is apt to shuffle her feet and withdraw to a vaguely non-platonistic position. This has been taken by some to indicate that there is something wrong with philosophical questions about the nature of mathematical objects and of mathematical knowledge. Carnap introduced a distinction between questions that are internal to a framework and questions that are external to a framework (Carnap 1950). Tait has worked out in detail how something like this distinction can be applied to mathematics (Tait 2005). This has resulted in what might be regarded as a deflationary version of platonism. According to Tait, questions of existence of mathematical entities can only be sensibly asked and reasonably answered from within (axiomatic) mathematical frameworks. If one is working in number theory, for instance, then one can ask whether there are prime numbers that have a given property. Such questions are then to be decided on purely mathematical grounds. Philosophers have a tendency to step outside the framework of mathematics and ask “from the outside” whether mathematical objects really exist and whether mathematical propositions are really true. In this question they are asking for supra-mathematical or metaphysical grounds for mathematical truth and existence claims. Tait argues that it is hard to see how any sense can be made of such external questions. He attempts to deflate them, and bring them back to where they belong: to mathematical practice itself. Of course not everyone agrees with Tait on this point. Linsky and Zalta have developed a systematic way of answering precisely the sort of external questions that Tait approaches with disdain (Linsky & Zalta 1995). It comes as no surprise that Tait has little use for Gödelian appeals to mathematical intuition in the philosophy of mathematics, or for the philosophical thesis that mathematical objects exist “outside space and time”. More generally, Tait believes that mathematics is not in need of a philosophical foundation; he wants to let mathematics speak for itself. In this sense, his position is reminiscent of the (in some sense Wittgensteinian) natural ontological attitude that is advocated by Arthur Fine in the realism debate in the philosophy of science. Benacerraf formulated an epistemological problem for a variety of platonistic positions in the philosophy of science (Benacerraf 1973). The argument is specifically directed against accounts of mathematical intuition such as that of Gödel. Benacerraf’s argument starts from the premise that our best theory of knowledge is the causal theory of knowledge. It is then noted that according to platonism, abstract objects are not spatially or temporally localized, whereas flesh and blood mathematicians are spatially and temporally localized. Our best epistemological theory then tells us that knowledge of mathematical entities should result from causal interaction with these entities. But it is difficult to imagine how this could be the case. Today few epistemologists hold that the causal theory of knowledge is our best theory of knowledge. But it turns out that Benacerraf’s problem is remarkably robust under variation of epistemological theory. For instance, let us assume for the sake of argument that reliabilism is our best theory of knowledge. Then the problem becomes to explain how we succeed in obtaining reliable beliefs about mathematical entities. Hodes has formulated a semantical variant of Benacerraf’s epistemological problem (Hodes 1984). According to our currently best semantic theory, causal-historical connections between humans and the world of concreta enable our words to refer to physical entities and properties. According to platonism, mathematics refers to abstract entities. The platonist therefore owes us a plausible account of how we (physically embodied humans) are able to refer to them. On the face of it, it appears that the causal theory of reference will be unable to supply us with the required account of the ‘microstructure of reference’ of mathematical discourse. A version of platonism has been developed which is intended to provide a solution to Benacerraf’s epistemological problem (Linsky & Zalta 1995; Balaguer 1998). This position is known as plenitudinous platonism. The central thesis of this theory is that every logically consistent mathematical theory necessarily refers to an abstract entity. Whether the mathematician who formulated the theory knows that it refers or does not know this, is largely immaterial. By entertaining a consistent mathematical theory, a mathematician automatically acquires knowledge about the subject matter of the theory. So, on this view, there is no epistemological problem to solve anymore. In Balaguer’s version, plenitudinous platonism postulates a multiplicity of mathematical universes, each corresponding to a consistent mathematical theory. Thus, in particular a question such as the continuum problem (cf.  section 5.1)  does not receive a unique answer: in some set-theoretical universes the continuum hypothesis holds, in others it fails to hold. However, not everyone agrees that this picture can be maintained. Martin has developed an argument to show that multiple universes can always to a large extent be “accumulated” into a single universe (Martin 2001). In Linsky and Zalta’s version of plenitudinous platonism, the mathematical entity that is postulated by a consistent mathematical theory has exactly the mathematical properties which are attributed to it by the theory. The abstract entity corresponding to ZFC, for instance, is partial in the sense that it neither makes the continuum hypothesis true nor false. The reason is that ZFC neither entails the continuum hypothesis nor its negation. This does not entail that all ways of consistently extending ZFC are on a par. Some ways may be fruitful and powerful, others less so. But the view does deny that certain consistent ways of extending ZFC are preferable because they consist of true principles, whereas others contain false principles.