 We noted above that while supervenience provides an attractive answer to the completeness question, it is not as popular now as it once was.  Part of the reason for this are the problems mentioned in Supervenience Physicalism: Further Issues.  But perhaps the most influential consideration here is what I will call the sufficiency problem, viz., the apparent fact that supervenience provides a necessary but not sufficient condition for the truth of physicalism. One way to bring out the sufficiency problem focuses on emergentism, a position on the mind-body problem influential in the first forty years of the twentieth century (Cf. Kim 1998; see also Wilson 2005; for the historical background to emergentism, see MacLaughlin 1992.) Emergentism may itself be understood in several ways, but in the sense that matters to the sufficiency objection, what is intended is a position that weaves together elements of both dualism and physicalism.  On the one hand, the emergentist wants to say that mental facts and physical facts are metaphysically distinct—just as a standard dualist does.  On the other hand, emergentist wants to agree with the physicalist that mental facts are necessitated by, and so supervene on, the physical facts.  If this sort of position is coherent, (1) does not articulate a sufficient condition for physicalism.  For if emergentism is true, any physical duplicate of the actual world is a duplicate simpliciter. And yet, if emergentism is true, physicalism is false. A different way to bring out the sufficiency problem focuses on the idea of a necessary being which is essentially nonphysical (Cf. Jackson 1998).  (Some theists believe that God provides an example of such a being.) If such a non-physical being exists, it is natural to suppose that physicalism is false. But if physicalism is defined according to (1), then physicalism may still be true, for it remains possible that any minimal physical duplicate of the world is a duplicate simpliciter.  So, again, (1) does not formulate a sufficient condition for the truth of physicalism. How to respond to the sufficiency problem? Some philosophers suppose that the issue is so serious that the only thing to do is to retreat from supervenience physicalism to type physicalism (e.g. Kim 1998).  The major burden on this proposal, however, is that, as we have seen, type physicalism was given up for a very good reason, e.g., multiple realizability. A different suggestion points out that the problem is only genuine if the cases that generate it are coherent – and are they? One reason against supposing so is that both seem to violate Hume's dictum that there are no necessary connections between distinct existences. According to emergentism, for example, mental and physical properties are metaphysically distinct, and yet are necessarily connected.  And if the non-physical necessary being exists at all, it will presumably be necessarily connected to the physical world and yet distinct from it.  However, Hume's dictum is itself a matter of controversy, so it is unclear if the cases can be dismissed in this way (see Jackson 1993, Stalnaker 1996, Stoljar 2010, and Wilson 2005, 2010). In view of the difficulty of responding to the sufficiency problem by either retreating to type physicalism or rejecting the examples that generate the problem, a natural option at this point is to agree that (1) does not articulate a sufficient condition for physicalism but search for a related proposal that does.  One suggestion along these lines, for example, might be to replace (1) with: Unlike (1), (11) does not have the consequence that the supervenience is sufficient for physicalism; hence it does not entail that physicalism is true if either emergentism is true or essentially non-physical necessary beings exist.  Of course, (11) faces the further problem of saying what metaphysical distinctness is, and more generally what the relation is between condition (a) and condition (b).  But it might also be supposed on behalf of (11) that the proponent of the sufficiency objection must already have answers to these questions, for otherwise the objection could not itself be advanced.