 One answer to the completeness question – an answer suggested initially in Davidson 1970 – looks to the notion of supervenience. (This notion is historically associated with meta-ethics, but it has received extensive discussion in the general metaphysics and logic literature. For a survey, see  supervenience.)  As we shall see as we proceed, supervenience is not quite as popular an answer to the completeness question as it once was, but it is nevertheless remains an attractive answer, and we may go a considerable distance by concentrating on it. The idea of supervenience might be introduced via an example due to David Lewis of a dot-matrix picture: Lewis's example gives us one way to introduce the basic idea of physicalism. The basic idea is that the physical features of the world are like the dots in the picture, and the psychological or biological or social features of the world are like the global properties of the picture. Just as the global features of the picture are nothing but a pattern in the dots, so too the psychological, the biological and the social features of the world are nothing but a pattern in the physical features of the world. To use the language of supervenience, just as the global features of the picture supervene on the dots, so too everything supervenes on the physical, if physicalism is true. It is desirable to have a more explicit statement of physicalism, and here too Lewis's example gives us direction. Lewis says that, in the case of the picture, supervenience means that “no two pictures can be identical in the arrangement of dots but different in their global properties”. Similarly, one might say that, in the case of physicalism, no two possible worlds can be identical in their physical properties but differ, somewhere, in their mental, social or biological properties. To put this slightly differently, we might say that if physicalism is true at our world, then no other world can be physically identical to it without being identical to it in all respects. This suggests the following account of what physicalism is (in the following formulation and in subsequent ones, we use “iff” to abbreviate “if and only if”): If physicalism is construed along the lines suggested in (1), then we have an answer to the completeness question. The completeness question asks: what does it mean to say that everything is physical. According to (1), what this means is that if physicalism is true, there is no possible world which is identical to the actual world in every physical respect but which is not identical to it in a biological or social or psychological respect. It will be useful to have a name for physicalism so defined, so let us call it supervenience physicalism.