 Jumping ahead some decades, adding possible worlds together with set theory to the logicians' toolbox has provided them with a very powerful and flexible framework for doing semantics. First, let us recall the modern notion of a function. A function is a set of ordered pairs. If <a,b> is in a function f, this means that the value of f for the argument a is b or, more concisely, f(a) = b. By the mathematical definition of a function, for each argument of a function there is one and only one value. So, if the ordered pair <a,b> is in a function f and so is <a,c>, then b is the same thing as c. The construction of propositional functions begins with possible worlds and the assumption that there are sets. Let us call the set of possible worlds W. A proposition is a set of possible worlds. The proposition that Zermela barks, for example, is all the sets of worlds in which Zermela barks. We also need to assume that there is a set I of possible individuals (i.e., the individuals that exist in at least one possible world). We now have all the materials to construct a simple type-theoretic hierarchy of functions. The usual treatment of the meaning of predicates differs slightly from the manner I have described here. Usually, the intension of a predicate is taken to be a function from possible worlds to sets of individuals (or sets of ordered pairs of individuals for binary relations, ordered triples for three place relations, and so on). Strictly speaking, these functions are not propositional functions because they do not take propositions as values. But for each such function, we can construct an ‘equivalent’ propositional functions by using a process called ‘Currying’ after the logician Haskell Curry. Let's start with a function f from worlds to sets of individuals. Then we can construct the corresponding propositional function g as follows. For each world w and individual i, we construct g so that w is in g(i) if and only if i is in f(w). So, the more standard treatment of the meanings of predicates is really equivalent to the use of propositional functions.