 The term ‘propositional function’ appears in print for the first time in Bertrand Russell's Principles of Mathematics (1903). Russell introduces the notion through a discussion of kinds of propositions. Consider propositions of the type that says of something that it is a dog. This is the kind ‘x is a dog’. This kind is a propositional function that takes any object o to the proposition that o is a dog. In this period, Russell holds that propositions are entities that have individuals and properties and relations as constituents. The proposition that Socrates is a man has Socrates and the property of being a man as constituents. In complex propositions the relation between propositional function and the proposition is less clear. Like Frege, Russell allows the abstraction of a propositional function from any omission of an entity from a proposition. Thus, we can view the proposition if Socrates drinks hemlock he will die as representing the application of the function x drinks hemlock ⊃ x will die to Socrates, or the function Socrates will drink x ⊃ Socrates will die to hemlock, and so on. In other words, Russell accepts the principle of multiple analyses. In the Principles, the quantifier ‘all’ is analyzed as a part of referring phrases that pick out classes (1903, 72). This, we can see, is a hold-over from the 19th Century extensional logicians (see Section 1). But in slightly later works, such as ‘On Denoting’ (1905), propositional functions are said to be constituents of universal propositions. According to this analysis the proposition expressed by sentences such as ‘All dogs bark’ is made up of the propositional function x is a dog ⊃ x barks and a function (of propositional functions) that is represented by the quantifier phrase ‘all’. Quantified propositions are interesting for us because they contain propositional functions as constituents. It is unclear whether Russell holds that propositional functions also occur as constituents in singular propositions like if Socrates drinks hemlock he will die. These propositions do contain properties, like dies, and relations, like drinks, but it is controversial as to whether Russell thinks that these are propositional functions (see Linsky 1999 and Landini 1998).