 Frege held that correct propositional attitude attributions must indicate the way that individuals are represented by the agent (the agent’s mode of presentation of the referent) and that an occurrence of a referential expression within the scope of a propositional attitude verb refers to a way of representing an object rather than to the expression’s ordinary referent. ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark’ as they occur in (5) and (6) refer to the same man, known under these two different names. (5) and (6) share common referents but express different propositions or thoughts. Those same expressions as they occur in (1) and (4), however, refer to different ways that Lois has of representing the man Superman. According to Frege, this difference in reference explains the difference in truth-value of (1) and (4). The ordinary sense of an expression – the way that the expression indicates its referent – becomes a part of the truth-conditions for a sentence in which the expression occurs, if that expression is used within a belief context. Within this linguistic environment, expressions refer to their customary senses. Frege held two distinct theses about terms in the scope of propositional attitude verbs – that they refer to the agent’s way of representing the object and that they refer to the ordinary sense. Frege unifies these theses by maintaining that the ordinary sense is a way of representing an object. Thus he can explain the difference in truth-value between (1) and (4). Propositional attitude verbs induce a shift in reference; occurrences of expressions within their scope refer to what Frege called their customary sense. Within the scope of an attitude verb expressions refer to what they express when outside the scope of an attitude verb. So, although ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark’ are co-referring as they occur in (5) and (6), they are not in (1) and (4), when inside the scope of a propositional attitude verb. Frege’s claim that propositional attitude verbs induce a reference shift allows him to preserve a substitution principle. The fact that (1) is true while (4) is false does not show that substituting co-referring singular terms within the scope of attitude verbs is illegitimate; instead, for Frege, it shows that ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark’, as they occur in (1) and (4), are not co-referring. The difference in sense between ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark’ also explains the difference in cognitive value between (5) and (6). Although both sentences have the same truth-value, because the constituents are co-referential, they express different senses, because the names ‘Clark Kent’ and ‘Superman’ express different senses, according to Frege. Although the truth-value of a sentence depends on the referents of terms, the cognitive value depends on the senses attached to the terms. [For further discussion of Frege’s theory, see the subsection on  Frege’s Theory of Sense and Denotation  in the entry on  Gottlob Frege.] So, Frege’s accounts of the two problems he calls our attention to coincide. (1) and (4) differ in truth-value precisely because (5) and (6) express different propositions.