 In Charles Peirce's ‘Logic of Relatives’ (1883), we see a move towards an understanding of terms as functions. One problem with traditional term logic is that it lacks the ability to deal with relations. Peirce's logic of relatives is meant to remedy that.  He adds terms to Boolean algebra that represent relations, and gives an extensional interpretation of them. They are not propositional functions in the full sense. Peirce's relatives are ‘common names’ that represent classes of pairs of objects (1883, 328). Thus, the logic of relatives represents a generalization of traditional logic rather than a departure from it. Peirce extends the algebra of terms to deal with particular features of relations. Like other terms, we can have conjunctive, disjunctive, and negative terms. Where f and g are relatives, then fg represents the class of pairs (I,J) such that I bears both f and g to J. Similarly, the disjunctive relative, f+g is such that it represent (I,J) if I bears either f or g to J and f′—the negation of the term f—represents the class of pairs (I,J) such that f does not hold between them. Peirce also has a composition operator, ; , such that f;g names (I,J) if there is some entity K such that f names (I,K) and g names (K,J). In ‘The Critic of Arguments’ (1892), Peirce adopts a notion that is even closer to that of a propositional function. There he develops the concept of the ‘rhema’. He says the rhema is like a relative term, but it is not a term. It contains a copula, that is, when joined to the correct number of arguments it produces an assertion. For example, ‘__ is bought by __ from __ for __’ is a four-place rhema. Applying it to four objects a, b, c, and d produces the assertion that  a is bought by b from c for d (ibid. 420). One especially interesting point about Peirce's rhema is that he uses the same chemical analogy as Frege does when they discuss the relation between relations and their arguments. They both compare relations (and properties) to ‘atoms or radicals with unsaturated bonds’. What exactly this analogy says of relations or properties, either in Frege or Peirce is somewhat unclear. See the entry on Peirce's logic, for a more complete exposition of his work.