 We have concluded our survey of the main accounts of propositional attitude reports and their problems. The discussion has focused on Frege’s puzzle. In this section we shall briefly discuss further puzzles that any account of propositional attitude ascribing sentences must deal with. The first is a pair of puzzles that Saul Kripke introduced in his 1979 and the second is a puzzle Richard introduced in his 1983. In his 1980 (originally presented as a series of lectures in 1970) Saul Kripke argued that the reference of a name is not determined by identifying descriptions a speaker associates with the name but rather by real world connections between uses of names and objects. In so arguing, Kripke, among others, paved the way for the now widely (although not universally) accepted direct reference theory of proper names. He also ran flat into Frege’s puzzle. In his 1980, Kripke claims to not know what to say about Frege’s puzzle and the related puzzle of cognitive significance, on the one hand, and the problem of negative existentials and the related problem of empty names, on the other. In John Locke lectures of 1973, now published as Kripke 2013, delivered three years after his famous Naming and Necessity lectures, Kripke addressed the second set of problems; in his 1979, he addressed the first. He did not aim to solve Frege’s puzzle. Instead, his aim was to show that his thesis of names, which he admitted seems to entail that the substitution of co-referring proper names within the scope of attitude verbs is legitimate, is not the true source of the trouble. Kripke argued that the problems could be replicated without assuming Kripke’s thesis about names, relying instead on translation principles and context-shifting principles. The problems driving Frege’s puzzle, Kripke aimed to show, did not concern the semantics of proper names. Frege’s puzzle could thus not be used to disprove any theory of the semantics of proper names. Kripke presented two sets of cases to convince us of this. The first case involves a monolingual (French-speaking) Frenchman – Kripke names him ‘Pierre’ – who hears about a city with the name ‘Londres’. Pierre forms a good opinion of the city based on what he hears of it (all in French) and is disposed to assent to (29) below. Pierre is competent and reflective, we can suppose, and so, by an application of the Disquotation principle, we get (30) below. Kripke then employs a translation principle, according to which a good translation of a sentence from one language into another preserves the truth-value of the original. (31) below is a good English translation of (30). So, like (30), (31) is also true. Suppose next that Pierre moves to a foreign land where he learns the native tongue by immersion; he doesn’t learn the translation of any of the words in his new language into French. He is confined to a rather dreary party of the city he lives in and comes to believe of it that it is not pretty. The foreign land, of course, is London and the language he learns is English. He is soon disposed to assent to (32). We can suppose that Pierre is as competent in English as any monolingual English speaker. We are then justified in using Disquotation to derive (33) below. We can go further. Suppose that Pierre positively rejects (34) below. Then, given Converse Disquotation, we get (35). We can suppose that Pierre is all the while still disposed to assent to (29); Pierre has not, we can suppose, changed his mind about what he believed about that foreign city he learned about in France under the name ‘Londres’. So, intuitively, (31) is also still true. We have the same set of contradictions we derived earlier in “Frege’s puzzle.” Because both (31) and (33) are true of Pierre at the same time and they appear to involve attribution to Pierre of belief in a proposition and its negation, it would seem that Pierre is irrational. Intuitively Pierre is free of irrationality in his beliefs. (31) and (35) seem to be, themselves, mutually inconsistent. Yet we derived them using the same basic principles driving Frege’s puzzle. Because we nowhere employed the thesis of direct reference nor a substitution principle seemingly entailed by the thesis of direct reference, Kripke concludes that simply denying the thesis of direct reference is not sufficient for solving the original Frege puzzle. After all, we get the very same set of problems without that thesis. The puzzle of Pierre relies upon a translation principle. But, lest one think that merely denying that translation principle suffices to solve Kripke’s puzzle, Kripke presents another version of the puzzle that does not involve translation across languages. This second puzzle has come to be known as “the Paderewski puzzle.” Suppose that Peter has had interactions with a politician he knows under the name ‘Paderewski’ and interactions with a pianist he knows under the name ‘Paderewski’. Peter has no idea that Paderewski-the-politician is the same person as Paderewski-the-pianist; he thinks that they are two different people who happen to have the same name, or at least names that are pronounced the same. From this assumption, we can see that we could employ Disquotation, Rationality, and Converse Disquotation to derive a set of contradictions similar to those involving Lois and Pierre described above. Notice that the puzzle here is not that of belief but that of belief attributions. So, for example, Taschek 1988 is quite right to observe that, no doubt, Peter possesses two separate modes of presentation of Paderewski under which he believes of him what he does. But this observation in itself does not solve Kripke’s puzzle, especially if we think that the public language name ‘Paderewski’ is univocal, at least when tied to the relevant Paderewski, and that Peter is speaking the public language. (Taschek offers solutions to Kripke’s puzzles in his 1997, 1998.) This is not to say that the puzzle is intractable – indeed, there have been many attempted solutions to both of Kripke’s puzzles. (See, for example, Bach 1997, Bealer 1993, Crimmins 1992a, Crimmins and Perry 1989, Forbes 1990, Lewis 1981, McKay 1981, Recanati 1993, Richard 1990, Salmon 1995a, Sosa 1996.) Rather, it is to say that in order to tract it, one must give an account of propositional attitude ascriptions. Any adequate account of propositional attitude ascriptions must account for what is going on in Kripke-style cases. And, as we have seen above in our discussion of ILFs, Kripke’s puzzles can be used to raise objections to certain proposals of attitude ascriptions. In his 1983, Mark Richard introduced us to a puzzle that seems to show that apparent substitution-failure is not confined to failures inside the scope of attitude verbs. Part of the interest in the case derives from the fact that it calls into question the idea that apparent substitution-failure intuitions can be explained by claiming that propositional attitude verbs create intensional contexts, being sensitive to more than just the ordinary referential content of terms within their scope. This is because Richard describes a case in which co-referential terms outside the attitude verb are intuitively not intersubstitutable. (Jennifer Saul presents very different cases intended to demonstrate the same point. See Braun and Saul 2002 and Saul 1997, 1999, 2007.) Whereas standard Frege cases exploit identity confusions of the agent of the belief alone, Richard’s cases exploit identity ignorances of the ascriber. Suppose that Sally is talking to Bill on the phone when she looks out the window and sees a steamroller heading towards an occupied phone booth. Sally doesn’t realize that the person in the phone booth is Bill. So, Sally is disposed to accept (36) but reject (37), despite their having the same referential content. (37) You [addressing Bill on the phone] are in danger. On the basis of this acceptance patterns, using the principles generating Frege’s puzzle, it would seem that the following are true as uttered by Sally. (39) I do not believe that you [addressing Bill on the phone] are in danger. So far, nothing too surprising; so far, that is, we just have a classic Frege-style case. But let’s continue the story. Sally tries to catch the attention of the person in the phone booth to warn him of the impending danger. She leans out of her window and waves her arms madly, screaming at the top of her lungs. Bill sees someone waving and yelling at him, comes to believe that that person believes of him that he is in danger (although, as he quickly looks around, not seeing the steamroller, can’t imagine why), but doesn’t realize that it is Sally waving her arms. He says to Sally over the phone, “There’s someone waving at me and she believes that I am in danger.” Sally believes what Bill says and so is disposed to accept (40) below. Unbeknownst to Bill and Sally, Sally is the person waving at Bill. The that-clauses in (39) and (40) are the same. Their difference resides in the different terms designating Sally, both of which occur outside the scope of ‘believes’. Even if we accept that co-designating terms are not intersubstitutable inside the scope of propositional attitude verbs, surely they are outside the scope of an attitude verb. So (40), together with the fact that Sally is the person waving at Bill, entails that (41) is true as spoken by Sally. (39) and (41) are mutually inconsistent. Furthermore, the truth of (41) seems out of keeping with the idea that what a person believes and what she does not believe is revealed by her sincere, competent, and reflective acceptance patterns, as we have already seen that Sally does not accept and indeed rejects (37). And as this idea is a driving force behind Frege’s puzzle, those who take Frege’s puzzle to raise problems for Naive Russellianism cannot simply respond to Richard’s puzzle by claiming that (39) is false. In 1983, Richard took this case to show that our apparent substitution-failure intuitions should be explained pragmatically and not semantically. Otherwise, he thought, we have substitution-failures outside the scope of attitude verbs, which is evidently unacceptable. While (39) may seem true and (41) may seem false, this is because we conflate what an utterance of these sentences pragmatically implicates, suggesting that Sally would accept the complement clause used to report what she believes. This same explanation, Richard insists, should be employed in both Frege’s and Kripke’s puzzles, leading us to Naive Russellianism. In their 1989, Crimmins and Perry respond to Richard’s challenge by accepting that there are substitution-failures even outside the scope of attitude verbs. But, they claim, such failures are limited to self-attributions like (41), because of what they call “the pragmatic principle of self-ascription...an utterance of ‘I believe that …t…’ provides (or, is about) the notion that is connected to the speaker’s use of ‘t’.” (p. 708). This response assumes that Richard-style cases require the first-person pronoun. But that assumption is false. All one needs to construct a Richard-style case is for the ascribers to be ignorant of the identities of the agents they are ascribing beliefs to. (Recall the cases of conflicting restrictions described above.) One can then use nothing but third-person means of designating the alleged believers and get the same intuitive variation in truth-values. Crimmins and Perry’s hope that such substitution-failures will be confined to cases involving the first-person pronoun is ill-founded. Hence, if one is simply going to accept the consequence that there are substitution failures even outside the scope of the attitude verb, then one will have to accept that consequence in an unrestricted form. Richard no longer believes that his case supports the claim that apparent substitution-failures are best explained pragmatically. In his 1990, Richard claims that the appearance of a contradiction turns on context-shifts. Suppose that Benny says, “I am hungry,” and Paula says, “I am not hungry.” Anyone who attempted to claim that they can’t both be speaking truly would be guilty of shifting the context in her attempt to derive a contradiction. Paula does not deny what Benny says, but instead says something about herself. The context-shift is obvious in this case, as it is obvious that ‘I’ is context-sensitive. The context-shift is less obvious, and hence more pernicious, claims Richard, in the case of propositional attitude verbs. Richard claims that when we judge (41) to be false, we are evaluating it relative to a context c such that, were we to evaluate (39) relative to c as well, we would see that it too is false. (In short, we are evaluating it in a context in which the operative restrictions on correlation functions are such that ‘that you [addressing Bill on the phone] are in danger’ is not mapped on to anything that Sally accepts.) When, on the other hand, we judge that (39) is true, we are evaluating it relative to a context c′ such that, were we to evaluate (41) relative to c′ as well, we would see that it too is true. So, claims Richard, our intuitions turn on shifting the context. If we focus on any single context, we see that there are no substitution failures outside the scope of attitude verbs. Richard offers a similar solution to Kripke’s puzzle. In Kripke-style cases, the attributor is conscious of the misidentification, and so it is plausible to claim that there is a context-shift. (Insofar as we grant that something like restrictions on correlation functions are part of context, that is.) The speaker is conscious of the fact that her uses of ‘London’ in representing Pierre’s beliefs are not completely univocal, as she first uses them to represent his “Londres”-beliefs and then to represent his “London”-beliefs. But in Richard’s case, the speaker need not be conscious of the misidentification and hence will not recognize any shift in the context. She will take her utterances of (39) and (41) to be part of a single communicative exchange in which no context shifts have been needed, precisely because she (that is, Sally) takes (39) to concern one person’s beliefs and (41) to concern another person’s beliefs. So, there are reasons to think that our intuitions concerning the truth and falsity of (39) and (41) do not rely on implicit context-shifting. Kripke’s puzzles of Pierre and Paderewski and Richard’s puzzle, like Frege’s puzzle, provide more data that any adequate account of attitude ascribing sentences must accommodate. Ultimately, any such account must fit with a broader theory of human interaction. People communicate their beliefs, they agree when they share a belief, and beliefs play a role in motivating and explaining action. Any account of belief attributions must say how proposition attitude ascribing sentences contribute to all of this, and the account must dividing the contribution into its semantic and pragmatic aspects.