 Many are reluctant to accept the claim that co-referring proper names are intersubstitutable within the scope of attitude verbs, even when they are attracted to the thesis of direct reference and the idea that the contents of some of our attitudes are nothing but singular propositions. Thus, many neo-Russellians reject Naive Russellianism. They would like to accept the intuitions that (1) is true and (4) is false while denying the Fregean claims that ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ are not directly referential and that all cases of identity confusion are to be explained in terms of a difference in thought grasped. They want it all. (5) and (6) express the same singular proposition, but (1) is true and (4) is false. While Naive Russellians claim that the information regarding how Lois believes what she does is, at best, merely part of what utterances of (1) and (4) pragmatically convey, “sophisticated” neo-Russellians would like that information to be part of the semantic content of the sentences in question. In this section we look at two broad strategies that promise to deliver these results: The first developed in Mark Crimmins and John Perry 1989 and Crimmins 1992 and the second suggested by a view presented in Mark Richard 1990. Crimmins and Perry argue that propositional attitude reports involve “unarticulated constituents” that concern how the subject of the report conceives of the proposition that the report alleges that she has an attitude towards. According to Crimmins and Perry, a typical utterance of (1) expresses a truth while a typical utterance of (4) expresses a falsehood. Both attributions, they claim, say of Lois that she believes the singular proposition about Superman to the effect that he is strong. But the first involves implicit reference to Lois’s “Superman-y” way of thinking of Superman and the second to Lois’s “Clark Kent-y” way of thinking of Superman. Because Lois believes that singular proposition in the first way and not the second, the two sentences will typically express different propositions that can diverge in truth-value. Crimmins and Perry embrace a metaphysics of thoughts and thinking similar to the standard Naive Russellian’s described above in the previous section. The difference between the views concerns whether or not the information semantically encoded by utterances of attitude reporting sentences is sensitive or insensitive to differences in the way a proposition is grasped. Extra-linguistic context determines what way of grasping (what Crimmins and Perry call an idea) an utterance of a propositional attitude ascribing sentence makes implicit reference to. (On the most plausible version of the view, a type of way of grasping, instead of a token way of grasping, that is implicitly referred to.) The expressions themselves (and not just their referents or semantic contents) are, however, typically relevant to what way of grasping is implicitly referred to. So, although substitution of co-referring names does not affect the proposition the propositional attitude ascribing sentence claims the target of the report to have an attitude towards, as it does on the Fregean view, in some cases it affects what way of grasping is implicitly referred to and hence is capable of affecting truth-value of a propositional attitude ascribing sentence. (Some call views of this kind “hidden-indexical theories” because the sentence does not contain a syntactic element that explicitly refers to a way of thinking. See Schiffer 1992, p. 503. Schiffer offered a version of this view in his 1977, as did Brian Loar 1972. Greg Fitch also presented a similar view in his 1984 and 1987. We focus on Crimmins and Perry’s version, which is the most fully developed version of the view.) Crimmins and Perry offer a way of insisting that the objects of many of our attitudes are singular propositions while still denying the substitution principle. They can thus accept all of the auxiliary principles and claims used to generate Frege’s puzzle (i.e., Disquotation, Converse Disquotation, the principle of Rationality, etc.) and, like Frege, deny that the co-reference of ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ licenses their inter-substitution in (1), while still claiming that ‘Superman’, as it occurs in (1), and ‘Clark Kent’, as it occurs in (2), are directly referential. The view seems to give us all that we could want: It respects our Fregean intuitions about truth-values without the sins of accepting a sense/reference distinction for singular terms like proper names, demonstratives, and indexicals. Crimmins and Perry’s view has been subject to criticism. We shall here briefly present only one line of objection. (See Bach 1993, Clapp 1995, Reimer 1995, Richard 1993, Rieber 1995, and Saul 1992. Crimmins responds to some of these objections in his 1992, 1995. Schiffer objects to Crimmins and Perry’s view in his 1992 and 1994 on the basis that ‘believes’ and other propositional attitude verbs do not express three-place relations, as their view requires. Ludlow responds to Schiffer’s “logical form” objection in his 1995, 1996. Schiffer responds to Ludlow in his 1996.) Many are attracted to the claim that contextual supplementation of what’s said is always traceable to some syntactic element; that is, the information semantically encoded by an utterance must have the same structure as the syntactic form of the sentence uttered. Call this the the principle of linguistic constraint. (See, for example, Stanley 2000, 2002 for a defense of this constraint. Recanati 2002 and Carston 1998, 2002, 2016 offer very sensitive defenses of unarticulated constituents.) One reason to accept this principle is that it helps to demarcate information that is conveyed by an utterance but not part of what is said by the sentence uttered. And it does this in a way that solves an overgeneration problem that threatens theories violating this constraint. Perhaps one can, given the correct conversational setting, using the sentence ‘2+2=4’ to communicate that one is going to the store. Even still, it seems plausible that the sentence itself does not say that, as nothing in the sentence contributes the relevant components of that communicated piece of information. Crimmins and Perry’s view is inconsistent with this principle, as they argue that ‘believes’ is syntactically two-place even though it expresses a three-place relation. So, anyone convinced that our semantic theories should be syntactically constrained will reject Crimmins and Perry’s view. Is there a way to make the information encoded by utterances of belief sentences sensitive to how the subjects of the reports grasp the propositions, while insisting that the propositions grasped are singular propositions, without making ways of grasping unarticulated constituents? We can get an idea of how to do this by looking at a view developed by Mark Richard 1990, 1993, 1995. Like Crimmins and Perry, Richard offers a semantics of propositional attitude reporting sentences that treats them as context-sensitive, respects something like neo-Russellianism (although we’ll return to this below), and yet blocks intersubstitution of co-referring names within the scope of propositional attitude verbs. Unlike Crimmins and Perry, however, Richard does not claim that ‘believes’ (and its fellow propositional attitude verbs) expresses a three-place relation and does not appeal to unarticulated constituents. Richard’s view is thus consistent with the principle of linguistic constraint. The key to Richard’s view is his claim that propositional attitude verbs are context-sensitive, expressing different two-place relations in different contexts. According to Richard, sentences express what he calls Russellian Annotated Matrices (RAMs). These are represented as tuples of pairs of linguistic expressions and their “Russellian interpretations.” (Richard notes that strictly speaking we don’t want a linguistic expression but rather some kind of internal representation to deal with cases like Kripke’s Paderweski case. See the discussion below in  Section 8.)  The pairs are called annotations. RAMs serve as both the semantic contents of sentences and the contents of beliefs. According to Richard’s account, (1), for example, is true relative to some context c and a world of evaluation w just in case Lois has a thought in w that is properly represented (relative to the standards in effect in c) by the sentence ‘Superman is strong’. The conversational setting generates restrictions on what words and sentences are proper translations of the representations of the alleged believer. Richard calls these restrictions on correlation functions. Correlation functions map annotations (used by the belief reporter) onto (sets of) annotations (employed in the alleged believer’s beliefs). The sentence ‘Superman is strong’ properly represents some thought p of Lois’s (relative to the restrictions in force in some context c) just in case a correlation function maps the RAM expressed by ‘Superman is strong’ to p that respects the relevant restrictions in force in c. Now, as there are contexts (and indeed, ordinary contexts will be just like this) in which ‘Superman is strong’ and ‘Clark Kent is strong’ are associated with different restrictions, we cannot substitute ‘Clark Kent’ for ‘Superman’ in (1) and preserve truth. Lois may well have a thought that can be appropriately represented, given the restrictions in the place in the context, by the first sentence but not the second. So, there is no problem in saying that (1) is true while (4) is false. Richard’s view is not a version of neo-Russellianism. This is because, on his view, the contents of propositional attitudes are not singular propositions. Instead, the content of the belief that Superman is strong, for example, contains the pair of Superman himself and something that plays the role of a mode of presentation – the annotation. But Richard’s view can be altered in such a way as to still retain its core features while being neo-Russellian, treating the contents of propositional attitudes and the contents of sentences containing proper names as singular propositions. The resulting view is in many ways superior to Richard’s view. Begin by assuming the Perry-inspired metaphysics of thought sketched earlier, in which we distinguish thought contents from thought states. We can then conceive of Richardian correlation functions as maps from complement clauses to thought states, preserving content. The content of both (5) and (6) is the singular proposition that Superman flies. Lois believes that proposition in virtue of being in a belief state related to ‘Superman flies’ but not ‘Clark Kent flies’. So, in a belief ascribing context in which the complement clauses are intended to represent the way by which the agent believes what she is claimed to believe, (1) is true and (4) is false. We can then have a neo-Russellian theory of the contents of the attitudes and semantics of singular terms like proper names, indexicals, and demonstratives that respects Fregean intuitions about the truth-values of (1)-(4) and is free of a commitment to unarticulated constituents. The view promises to offer a more plausible account of when two agents “believe the same thing,” which Richard’s own fine-grained account of the contents of attitudes cannot, as our intuitions about when two agents count as believing the same thing are often insensitive to difference in how agents believe what they believe. Such an account seems to be the most promising way to count (1) true and (4) false. Both Richard’s account and the modified neo-Russellian version of that account sketched above face a serious problem: The problem of conflicting restrictions. (See Sider 1995 and Soames 1995.) To build up to the objection, consider cases in which a speaker is ascribing beliefs to different agents. It may be common ground that those agents conceive of matters differently. In such a case, the speaker may intend the same complement clause to represent different types of belief states for different agents. Consider the following case as an example. Suppose that Bob and Susan are looking at a picture of Bill Clinton. Bob might then use the complement clause ‘that he [pointing at the picture] was president’ to represent a first-person belief state when ascribing beliefs to Bill Clinton and a different type of belief state, certainly not a first-person belief state, when ascribing beliefs to George Bush. After all, we can imagine Frege-style cases in which the type of belief state Bob intends to specify might be essential to the point of his speech. We can now move to the problem of conflicting restrictions. Suppose now that the ascriber is confused about the identities of the subject of the report. So, for example, suppose Lois is ascribing beliefs to Superman and Clark Kent. Because she believes that Superman is not Clark Kent, she takes herself to be ascribing beliefs to two different people, depending on how she conceives of Superman. But then we can imagine circumstances, similar to the ones with Bob and Susan described above, in which her intentions generate conflicting restrictions on a single complement clause. So, for example, Lois might intend ‘he’, pointing at a picture of Lex Luthor, in ‘that he is evil’ to represent a visual/perceptual demonstrative when ascribing beliefs to Superman and a nondemonstrative, great-deeds conception of Luthor when ascribing beliefs to Clark Kent. (Suppose that Lois believes that Superman knows of Lex Luthor personally, from his interactions with him, whereas Clark Kent only knows about Lex Luthor through newspaper reports and the testimony of others.) So, when Lois says, “Superman believes that he [pointing at the picture of Luthor] is evil,” she intends to convey that Superman has a belief to the effect that he [visual presentation of Luthor] is evil and when she says, “Clark Kent believes that he [pointing at the picture of Luthor] is evil,” she intends to convey that Clark Kent has a belief to the effect that such-and-so criminal mastermind is evil. This is problematic for Richard because these restrictions conflict and so there is no correlation function that respects all the operative restrictions. As a result, any belief attribution Lois might make in such a conversational setting to Superman/Clark Kent with a complement clause containing ‘he [visual presentation of Luthor]’ as subject is false. Even ‘Superman believes that he [visual presentation of Luthor] is self-identical’ is false. This is intuitively unacceptable. Although Lois is confused, she can intuitively still say a few true things about Superman’s beliefs concerning Lex Luthor. Richard responds to this problem in his 1995 by claiming that when there are conflicting restrictions operative in a context, a relevant sentence is true in the context just in case it is true on every resolution of the conflict. Nelson 2002, 2005 criticizes Richard’s response, arguing that it still does not accommodate all intuitive truth-value judgments, as it still counts false some utterances that are intuitively true. Both Crimmins and Perry’s account and Richard’s account have a similar goal: Accept the intuitive judgments of the truth-value of sentences like (1)-(4) without accepting the Fregean claim that the belief that Superman is strong is distinct from the belief that Clark Kent is strong. We have, however, seen reasons to doubt that either succeeds in realizing this goal.