 After the Principles, however, Russell comes to believe that the simple theory of types is insufficient. The reason for it has to do with the   liar paradox. Suppose that ‘L’ is a name for the proposition: L is false. This statement is false if and only if it is true. The problem here has something to do with self-reference, but it cannot be avoided by the simple theory of types alone. For simple types only give us a hierarchy of types of propositional functions. In simple type theory, all propositions have the same type. The idea behind ramified type theory is to introduce a hierarchy of propositions as well. On this view, propositions and propositional functions have an order. If a propositional function is applied to a proposition of a particular order, then it yields a proposition of a higher order. And every function must have a higher order than its arguments. Thus, we avoid the liar paradox by banning a proposition from occurring within itself. If a proposition p occurs within another proposition, as the argument of a function such as x is false, then the resulting proposition is of a higher order than p. Unfortunately, Russell never gives a precise formulation of ramified type theory. Perhaps the best formulation is due to Alonzo Church (1976).[1] Almost at the same time as he adopts the ramified theory of types, Russell abandons propositions. From about 1908 until 1918, although Russell retains the idea that there are true propositions, he denies that there are false ones. When we think about something that is false, say, Zermela is a cat, we are not thinking about a false proposition, but rather the objects of our thought are just Zermela and the property of being a cat. It might seem odd to have a hierarchy especially designed to stratify the propositions and then claim that there are no propositions. Some interpreters, however, have claimed that Russell's denial of the existence of propositions should not be taken seriously and that there are very good reasons to read Principia as being largely a theory of propositions (see Church 1984). One reason to take the ramified theory of types seriously (even without accepting propositions) is that it can be usefully incorporated into a substitutional theory of quantification. On the substitutional interpretation of the quantifiers, a universally quantified formula such as (∀x)Fx is true if and only if all of its instances Fa1, Fa2, Fa3,… are true. Similarly, (∀x)Fa is true if and only if at least one of its instances is true. Consider a substitutional interpretation of quantifiers with variables ranging over predicates, as in the formula, (∀P)Pa. This formula is true if and only if all of its instances are true. On a simple theory of types, the type of the variable P is <i>, since its arguments are all individuals (or singular terms). But the simple type of the function, (∀P)Px is also <i>. So an instance of (∀P)Pa is (∀P)Pa itself. A substitutional interpretation of the quantifiers requires that instances be simpler than the formulas of which they are instances. In this case, all we find out is that a particular formula is true only if it is true. This is uninformative and it seems viciously circular. To block this sort of circularity, we can turn to the ramified theory of types. On the ramified theory, the propositional function (∀P)Px is of order 2, because of the presence of the quantifier binding a variable of order 1. In this way, the ramified theory forces formulas to be simpler (at least in terms of order) than the formulas of which they are instances (see Hazen and Davoren 2000).