 Much of contemporary ontology builds on the assumption that existence is to be understood in terms of quantification: in a slogan, to exist is to be something. Ontology is largely concerned with the domain of the existential quantifier. This assumption can be traced back to the work of Frege and Russell, both of whom analyzed quantification in terms of predication, and plays a crucial role in Quine’s admonition to transform ontology into the study of the ontological commitments of our global theory of the world regimented in the language of quantificational logic and identity. By the link between quantification and existence, we mean the claim that to exist is to be identical to something. This view can be traced back to Frege and Russell, who offered roughly the same broad analysis of quantification in terms of predication. The entry on  existence  provides a helpful overview and discussion of their account of existence against the background of the historical context in which they produced it. In what follows, we highlight a distinction between the Frege-Russell analysis of quantification in terms of predication, on the one hand, and the link between quantification and existence, on the other. Frege (1980a, 1980b) explicitly analyzed quantification in terms of predication. For Frege, first-level predicates express concepts under which objects fall. A quantifier expresses a second-level concept under which first-level concepts fall. In particular, he proposed to take a sentence like (3) below to predicate of a first-level concept that it has instances: The existential quantifier, \(\exists\), is, for Frege, a second-level predicate, which expresses a second-level concept under which a first-level concept such as square root of 4 falls if and only if it has some instances. Likewise, the universal quantifier, \(\forall\), is a second-level predicate, which expresses a second-level concept under which a first-level concept such as self-identical falls if and only if it has all objects as instances. Russell (1905) offered a similar account of quantification. On Russell’s analysis, the proposition expressed by (5) predicates of a certain propositional function that it maps every object whatever into a true proposition. (The entry on  propositional functions  provides more detail on the role of propositional functions in the early development of modern logic.) The propositional function \(x\) is self-identical maps the Moon to the true proposition that the Moon is self-identical, it maps the Sun to the true proposition that the Sun is self-identical, etc. The thrust of (5) is the proposition that no matter what object we supply as argument, the propositional function \(x\) is self-identical will map it into a true proposition. The only salient difference between Frege and Russell’s account of quantification lies in the choice of concepts and propositional functions, respectively, as the objects of predication; while Frege takes each quantifier to correspond broadly to a second-level concept, Russell analyzes them in terms of certain properties of propositional functions. Both Frege and Russell combine their account of quantification in terms of predication with the substantive thesis that existence is to be understood in terms of quantification. For Frege, existence is to be identified with the second-level concept expressed by the second-level predicate expressed by \(\exists\). For Russell, existence is identified with a certain property of propositional functions, e.g., being sometimes true. This may seem overkill; if true, it might seem that only first-level concepts exist, not the objects they instantiate. For only first-level concepts are instances of the second-level concept expressed by  \(\exists\).[17]  Instead, they are mostly concerned with the thesis that statements of existence such as (7) are not cases in which a primitive property of existence is predicated of an object, but rather should be understood as an implicitly quantified statement such as (8), which is to be analyzed in terms of predication in (9) and (10) for Frege and Russell, respectively: This point is perfectly compatible with the existence of a first-level concept under which all and only those objects that exist fall. Take, for example, the concept being self-identical. Likewise for Russell. The propositional function \(x\) is self-identical will map all objects that exist into a true proposition. Note, however, that one could in principle retain their analysis and deny, for example, that first-level concepts and propositional functions, respectively, can only be saturated by objects that exist. One could take the view that some great philosophers who once existed, no longer exist. Socrates, for example, was a great philosopher who no longer exists. He can nevertheless instantiate the first-level concept admired by many philosophers. Or consider the bookcase I would have built, had I finally assembled all the materials I purchased according to the assembly instructions that came with them. I have had concrete plans to build the bookcase for ages now; never mind the fact that I may never find the skill, time or energy to assemble it. My planned bookcase does not exist yet, and knowing myself, it might well never exist. But one might take the view that we can refer to it and that it instantiates many first-level concepts such as being a planned bookcase. On a view like this, the assertion that there are planned bookcases that do not exist would remain true even if none of its instances exist. A view like this would be classified as a form of Meinongianism by Nelson (2012), and it would be subject to some of the difficulties other forms of Meinongianism face. Suffice it to say, for present purposes, that it would, however, require a radical departure from a very influential approach to ontology advocated by Quine and endorsed by philosophers like Peter van Inwagen and David Lewis and their followers. Quine (1948) explicitly characterizes ontology as an attempt to answer the question “what is there?” As he observed, the question may seem deceptively simple, since it may be answered in a word: “everything”. The problem with this answer is that it is largely uninformative. All parties agree that everything is something, but there is still plenty of room of disagreement as to what kinds of objects are there. Are there mereologically composite objects? Are there concrete possible worlds? Are there mathematical objects? If there are such objects, then they will of course lie in the domain of the quantifier “everything”. However, philosophers are still intensely divided as to whether they do. Quine’s strategy for the regimentation and resolution of ontological disputes has informed much of contemporary ontology. He advised philosophers to look at the ontological commitments incurred by our best global theory of the word—best by ordinary scientific standards or principled extensions thereof—when appropriately regimented in the language of pure quantificational logic with  identity.[18]  One may perhaps think of the ontological commitments of our best global theory of the world as the demands that the truth of our total theory imposes on the world. For example, we are committed to the existence of objects of kind \(K\) if a proper regimentation of our best global theory includes—or entails—a sentence of the form \(\exists x \ Fx\), where \(F\) is a predicate under which only objects of kind \(K\) fall. Quine’s advice comes accompanied with a criterion of ontological commitment whereby an appropriately regimented body of doctrine is ontologically committed to objects of kind \(K\) just in case objects of kind \(K\) must lie in the range of our bound variables for the sentences of our theory to be true. More details are given in section 5 of the entry on  Quine. As Cartwright (1954) observed, it is far from clear how one is supposed to interpret the modality in Quine’s official formulation of the criterion. A purely extensional version of the criterion is plainly inadequate: \(T\) is ontologically committed to objects of kind \(K\) if, and only if, \(T\) is true only if the variables range over objects of kind \(K\). But the material conditional is much too weak for Quine’s purposes as it makes any false theory to be ontologically committed to all kinds of  objects.[19]  Quine’s general hostility to non-extensional notions makes the problem all the more delicate for him. Under Quine’s approach to ontology, an argument for the existence of objects of kind \(K\)—whether mereologically complex objects, or concrete possible worlds, or mathematical objects—takes the form of an argument for the thesis that quantification over such objects is indispensable to our best global theory of the world. One of the most familiar instances of such arguments is the Quine-Putnam argument for the existence of mathematical objects. Since mathematical objects are indispensable for scientific purposes, we should expect the quantifiers of our best global theory of the world to range over them. But once we settle the question of whether the quantifiers of our best global theory of the world range over mathematical objects, we have settled the ontological question of whether such objects exist. The entry on  indispensability arguments in mathematics  includes extensive discussion of this and related indispensability arguments in mathematics. Similar arguments have been deployed outside mathematics to argue for the existence of possible worlds, mereologically complex objects, and the like. This brings us to a family of applications for different styles of quantification explored above. It is not uncommon to respond to indispensability arguments for the existence of objects of a certain kind by means of a paraphrase strategy, which if successful, would show how to make do without the ontological commitment to objects of the offending kind. Oftentimes, the paraphrase will involve a different style of quantification, whether an alternative to classical quantification or an extension thereof. For example, Gottlieb (1980) attempted to respond to the Quine-Putnam indispensability argument for the existence of numbers by dispensing with objectual quantification in favor of substitutional quantification in arithmetic. Burgess & Rosen (1997) provides an extensive catalogue of different expressive resources philosophers have used in order to bypass apparent commitment to mathematical objects. Or take the question, for example, whether there are composite objects of various kinds. Dorr & Rosen (2002), Hossack (2000); and van Inwagen (1995) have each argued that plural quantification can be used to paraphrase away apparent ontological commitment to composite objects—other than organisms in van Inwagen’s case: we need only replace apparent singular quantification over composite objects with plural quantification over its alleged parts, and replace apparent singular predications of a composite object with plural predications of their  parts.[20] When Quine answers “everything” to the fundamental ontological question of what there is, he presumably intends the quantifier to range unrestrictedly over all objects at once. This observation applies to ontological inquiry more generally. When a nominalist asserts that there are no mathematical objects, she does not intend the thesis to be qualified by a restriction to a domain of concrete objects; otherwise, the thesis would be devoid of interest. But unrestricted quantification is not a very common phenomenon outside highly theoretical contexts such as logic and ontology. Take a typical use of a quantifier expression in English as exemplified in a typical utterance of the sentence: In a typical context, the use of the quantifier “everything” is tacitly restricted to a domain of contextually salient objects. In particular, it would be inappropriate for another participant in the conversation to point out that the Moon is not on sale. The Moon is not an exception to the statement made by my utterance of (11) because the Moon does not lie in the domain of quantification associated to my use of the quantifier. But the fact that unrestricted quantification is relatively uncommon is no reason to doubt it is attainable in certain contexts. Unfortunately, many philosophers have recently doubted that genuinely unrestricted quantification is even coherent, much less  attainable.[21]  Note that these philosophers face at least two preliminary challenges, both of which are forcefully pressed by Williamson (2003). First, they face the question of what to make of the prospects of ontological inquiry without unrestricted generality. How should we formulate substantive ontological positions such as nominalism, if we cannot hope to quantify over all objects at once? The second challenge for the skeptics is to state their own position. To the extent to which the thesis that we cannot quantify over everything appears to entail that there is something over which cannot quantify, skeptics seem to find themselves in a bind by inadvertently quantifying over what, by their own lights, lies beyond a legitimate domain of  quantification.[22]  Typical responses to each problem involve a surrogate for unrestricted generality in the form of either schematic generality or the use of certain modal operators to simulate quantification over a series of ever more comprehensive domains of  quantification.[23] At the core of the problem lies the assumption that the set-theoretic paradoxes cast doubt upon the existence of a comprehensive domain of all objects. What they reveal, according to Dummett (1991, 1993), is the existence of indefinitely extensible concepts like set, ordinal, and object. For Dummett, the indefinite extensibility of set is incompatible with the existence of a comprehensive domain of all sets, since no matter what putative domain of all sets we isolate, we find that we can employ Russell’s reasoning to characterize further sets that lie beyond the putative domain of all sets with which we began. The set of all non-self-membered sets in the initial domain cannot, on pain of contradiction, be in that domain, which means that it must lie in a more comprehensive domain of all sets. If there is no domain of all sets, there is, the thought continues, no hope for a domain of all objects. One may respond to this line of argument by contesting Dummett’s diagnosis of the set-theoretic antinomies. Boolos (1993) suggests that we take Russell’s paradox, for example, to establish that not every condition determines a set. The moral of Russell’s paradox is that there is no set of all non-self-membered sets, not that it lies beyond the initial domain of quantification. For another line of attack against the coherence of unrestricted quantification, one may ask what exactly is a domain of quantification supposed to be. Skeptics often take a page from modern model theory and think of a domain of quantification as a set—or at least as a set-like object, which contains as members all objects over which the putatively unrestricted quantifier is supposed to range. They take for granted that for a speaker to be able to quantify over some objects, they must all be members of some set-like object, which constitutes a domain of quantification. Cartwright (1994) called this thesis the All-in-One Principle. Now, if there is unrestricted quantification, then the domain of quantification associated to it cannot be a set-like object. For we could then deploy a suitable variation on Russell’s paradox in order to obtain a  contradiction.[24]  Many have concluded from this that there is no genuinely unrestricted quantification over all objects at once. The All-in-One principle is not beyond doubt. One application of plural quantification, which is explored by Cartwright (1994), is to abandon the All-in-One principle and to understand talk of a domain of quantification not as singular talk of collections but rather as plural talk of its members. To speak of a domain of certain objects is just to speak of the objects themselves—or to speak of a first-level concept under which they all fall; and to claim of a given object that it lies in the domain is to claim of the object that it is one of them. Alternatively, one may opt for the expressive resources of second-order quantification with the second-order quantifiers taken to range over Fregean concepts. Williamson (2003) outlines a conception of a domain of quantification as a Fregean concept under which certain objects may fall. To speak of a domain of all objects on this view is to speak of a Fregean concept under which all objects—without restriction—fall, and to claim of a given object that it lies in the domain is merely to claim that the object falls under the relevant Fregean concept. The combination of quantification and modality traces back to Barcan (1946, 1947) and Carnap (1946). Historically, however, this combination came under sustained attack by Quine, who, like Carnap, assumed that \(\Box\) could only interpreted in terms of logical necessity or analyticity. As Carnap himself recognized, the linguistic conception of necessity raises the question of how to assign intelligible truth conditions to de re modal generalizations of the form \(\exists x \ \Box  Px\).[25]  For the truth conditions for such a sentence appear to require one to make sense of the truth of an open formula of the form \(\Box Px\) with respect to an assignment of a value to the variable \(x\). If we read \(\Box\) to mean: “it is analytic that”, then one may wonder what sense could be made of the claim that an open formula \(Px\) is analytic with respect to an assignment of an object to \(x\). Quine had anticipated the issue in Quine (1943), and he pressed the criticism again in Quine (1953, 1960). Quine’s objections are commonly taken not to apply to other interpretations of \(\Box\) in terms of metaphysical necessity as discussed, for example, in Kripke (1980). When we move past Quine’s criticisms and combine pure quantificational logic with propositional modal logic, we obtain quantified modal logic. The interaction of quantification and modality turns out to raise difficult philosophical problems. As we will see, some of these difficulties have, in fact, inclined some philosophers to rethink the scope of pure quantificational logic. The problem is that certain theorems of quantified modal logic suggest that everything is necessarily something. The subject matter of ontology is necessary: nothing could have failed to be something. Quantified modal logic is the system that combines pure quantificational logic with propositional modal logic. Propositional modal logic investigates the logic of the modal operators \(\Box\) and \(\Diamond\) and is discussed in the entry on  modal logic.  The language of propositional modal logic supplements the language of propositional logic with the sentential operator \(\Box\), and \(\Diamond\) may then be explicitly defined as \(\neg \Box \neg\). A weak propositional modal logic called K logic includes as axioms all tautologies and all instances of schema K: The rules of inference of the system include modus ponens and what is often known as a rule of necessitation: The combination of propositional modal logic and pure quantificational logic is often called quantified modal logic and is discussed in section 13 of the entry on  modal logic  and the entry on  actualism.  This combination immediately delivers what we may call the necessity of being: The key to this observation is that the open formula \(\exists y \ x = y\) is a theorem of pure quantificational logic. Successive applications of the rule of necessitation and universal generalization are all it takes to complete the proof. On the alethic interpretation of \(\Box\) in terms of metaphysical necessity, this theorem reads as the claim that everything is necessarily something. Take the Griffith Observatory, for example. It is a consequence of the theorem that it is necessarily something. The Griffith Observatory would have been something even if no funds had been available for construction and nothing had ever been built in the site it occupies. And what is true of the Griffith Observatory is true of us: each of us is necessarily something. When we combine this result with the link between quantification and existence, we conclude that everything exists necessarily, which flies in the face of the assumption that we exist only contingently. With the help of schema K, one may prove the Converse Barcan Formula: On the alethic interpretation of the modality, this states that if necessarily, everything is \(A\), everything is necessarily \(A\). The proof is given, for example, in one of the supplements to the entry on  actualism.  But this provides another route to the necessity of being: since necessarily, everything is something, everything is necessarily something. In the presence of a further plausible modal principle, B, we may even prove the Barcan Formula. The Brouwerian principle, B, states that whatever is the case is necessarily, possibly the case: The Barcan Formula states that if everything is necessarily \(A\), then necessarily, everything is \(A\): Or, equivalently: The entry on  actualism  includes a proof of BF. But this formula is deemed unacceptable by many philosophers. Consider my plans to build a bookcase. Even if I never manage to build one, it is certainly possible for me to build one. So, it is possible for there to be some bookcase I have built. By the Barcan Formula, it seems to follow that something is possibly a bookcase I build. The Barcan Formula does not settle whether or not this object is in fact a concrete object, much less a bookcase one may in fact use to store one’s books. In fact, to deny this is one way to come to terms with the Barcan Formula. What is true of the combination of pure quantificational logic with propositional modal logic is mutatis mutandis true of the combination of pure quantificational logic and propositional tense logic. Certain theorems of quantified tense logic suggest that everything has always been, is, and will always be something. The domain of ontology is immutable: nothing ever fails to be something. Propositional tense logic investigates the logic of tense operators like \(H\), read: “it has always been the case that”, \(P\), read: “it was the case that”, \(G\), read: “it will always be the case that”, and \(F\), read: “it will be the case that”. In place of K, we have distribution axioms: And in place of the rule of necessitation, we have rules of temporal generalization: More details are provided in the entry on  temporal logic. The combination of propositional tense logic and pure quantificational logic immediately delivers the eternality of being: which states that everything has has always been, is, and will always be, something. The Griffith Observatory was something even before it was built in 1935—and will always be something—even billions of years from now. And what is true of the Griffith Observatory is true of us: each of us has always been, is, and will be something—even before our birth and long after our death. Quantified tense logic proves temporal versions of CBF: And, finally, we have two temporal versions of BF: In order to appreciate the difficulty, we may take the contrapositive of the temporal version of BF for \(H\), where \(P\) is defined as usual, as: \(\neg H \neg\): We infer, for example, that there were dinosaurs only if there are past dinosaurs. If to exist is to be something, then past dinosaurs exist. But whether this commits us to flesh-and-blood dinosaurs is of course a different matter, since being a past dinosaur need not require being a dinosaur. The interaction between pure quantificational logic and tense and modality suggests the domain of ontology is immutable and necessary. But we can only draw these conclusions by making use of some auxiliary assumptions, some of which are far from obvious. The highly counterintuitive character of the conclusions has consequently led many philosophers to place some of the auxiliary assumptions under close scrutiny. Other philosophers have followed argument where it leads, and they have sought to reconcile the eternal and necessary character of the domain of ontology with the apparent temporary and contingent character of existence. In fact, Williamson 2013 set out to provide a separate battery of arguments for the necessity and immutability of ontology. One auxiliary assumption one may question is the traditional link between quantification and existence. Even if there is no change in the domain of quantification, you may nevertheless think that existence is only temporary. Socrates did not exist either before 490 BCE or after 399 BCE, and the mere fact that he is, has and will always be something is not reason to attribute existence to him. One variant of this move is a direct descendant of Meinong’s view on existence as a mere species of being. But to the extent to which Meinongianism may be accompanied with the implausible thesis that no matter what condition we substitute for \(F\) in “the \(F\) is \(F\)” gives rise to a true sentence, it would seem to entail that “the round square is a round square” is true, which seems hopeless. But the Meinongian thesis is not compulsory for more plausible developments of the view that not everything exists, even though everything is  something.[26]  What is not negotiable, though, is the thesis that existence should not be taken to be expressed by a quantificational expression, but rather by a predicate which may or not apply to objects in the domain. The moral of the temporal versions of BF and CBF is only that unrestricted quantification ranges over an immutable and necessary domain of objects, whether or not they enjoy temporary and contingent existence. The difficult question remains of how to answer Quine’s question “what is there?” once one abandons the thesis that no matter what condition \(F\) may be, there are objects that satisfy the condition. For more on different variants of Meinongianism, the reader may consult the entry on  existence. There is, in the second place, the assumption that the axioms of pure quantificational logic remain true when we expand the language to include other sentential operators, whether temporal, modal or  otherwise.[27]  What is perhaps the most common response to our predicament is to recoil from pure quantificational logic into a suitably weakened variant of it. This is, for example, the path taken in Kripke (1963), where Kripke proposes to weaken the axiom of universal instantiation in line with the first version of inclusive quantificational logic discussed earlier. Since \(\exists y \ x = y\) is not a theorem of inclusive quantificational logic, we are not in a position to necessitate, which blocks the derivation of the necessity of  being.[28]  Kripke’s quantified modal logic is discussed in the entry on  actualism.  Others have fallen back into alternative forms of free logic, but there appears to be no consensus as to which one is the best alternative to pure quantificational logic. It may be helpful to note, however, that some of the relevant free logics merely restrict the axiom of universal instantiation by means of an existence predicate and do nothing to block the derivation of other allegedly problematic principles such as the necessity of identity, which is the thesis that everything is necessarily self-identical. Since, presumably, an object can only be necessarily self-identical if it exists necessarily, opponents of CBF will also want to have some resources to block the necessity of identity. The derivability of the necessity of identity from the axioms of identity and the rule of necessitation may perhaps invite one to consider another option. Maybe the culprit is not pure quantificational logic, but rather the indiscriminate use of the rule of necessitation. The rationale for necessitation is that every provable sentence should be necessarily true, but it is not clear how this thought is supposed to generalize to open formulas, which, strictly speaking, are not true or false. Open formulas are merely true or false under an assignment of values to their free variables. But the fact that \(x = x\), for example, is true under an assignment \(s\) on which \(x\) is assigned a table is no reason to think that \(x = x\) is necessarily true under such an assignment if you think that the table could have not been  there.[29]  One problem for this strategy is that it is of little help when we allow closed terms such as constant symbols into the language of quantified modal logic. In the presence of constant symbols, classical quantificational logic allows us to derive the sentence \(\exists x \ a = x\) as a theorem, whence, by necessitation for complete sentences, we infer \(\Box \exists x \ a= x\), which seems objectionable if \(a\) is suppose to regiment a name for an object that exists only contingently. One could avoid the problems by barring closed terms from the language, but such a radical exclusion seems ad hoc and artificial. So, if one chooses to restrict necessitation, one must provide a different rationale for it. Deutsch (1990) provides an example of this strategy. The fourth and final option to consider is to take the derivability of CBF in tense and modal logic at face value, and embrace the conclusion that existence is indeed immutable and necessary. These are the theses that Williamson (2013) calls “permanentism” and “necessitism”. The task for each approach is to explain our initial reluctance to embrace them in the first place. Take the apparent resistance to accept the claim that Socrates will always be something despite the fact that he died in 399 BCE. The permanentist may respond that if we are initially disinclined to accept this claim, it is only because we mistakenly think that because a person, for example, is a concrete object, a past or a future person must be concrete as well. Socrates, which is a past person, was not a person either before 490 BCE or after 399 BCE; indeed, Socrates is now not a person, nor will he be one in the future. Likewise, a merely possible person need not be a person either and neither the Barcan nor the Converse Barcan Formula threaten the temporary and contingent character of concreteness. Since I could have found the time, skill and energy to build a bookcase, some object is possibly a bookcase built by me. But the necessitist will be at pains to add that to be a possible bookcase built by me is not to be a bookcase built by me, much less a bookcase. This outlook is defended by Linsky & Zalta (1994) and Williamson (2013). But there are other points of contact. For example, all versions of necessitism must reject unqualified “essentialist” theses such as the view that a person is necessarily a person; at most, one can perhaps maintain the weaker thesis that a person is necessarily if concrete, a person. Likewise, all versions of necessitism seem committed to the actual existence of many more nonsets than can form a set. Sider (2009), for example, argues that necessitism is committed to the actual existence of at least \(\kappa\) nonsets for each set-theoretic cardinal \(\kappa\). And Hawthorne & Uzquiano (2011) raises other cardinality problems for a combination of necessitism with certain common mereological assumptions.