 Some philosophers (e.g., Dretske (1995), Tye (1995)) use this troublesome expression simply to mean a sensory quality, and this is one of the two meanings it has had in recent philosophy of mind. But in the fourth paragraph of this entry, the phrase was introduced in the context, “‘what it’s like’ for the subject to be in a particular mental state, especially what it is like for that subject to experience a particular qualitative property,” which indicates that there is another sense (4) in which (when the mental state does involve a sensory quality) the “what it’s like” is something over and above the quality itself. In fact, since this second “what it’s like” is itself a property of the quality, it cannot very well be identical with the quality. It is the property of what it is like to experience that quality; alternately, the relevant introspectible property of the experience itself. Let us now just speak of “what it’s like” (WIL) properties, meaning just this higher-order phenomenal sort. Block (1995), like many other writers, fails to distinguish WIL properties from sensory qualities. But Carruthers (2000) elaborates nicely on the distinction: A quality in the first-order sense presents itself as part of the world, not as part of one’s mind. It is, e.g., the apparent color of an apparently physical object (or, if you are a Russellian, the color of a sense-datum that you happen to have encountered as an object of consciousness). A sensory quality is what the world is or seems like. But what it is like to experience that color is what your first-order perceptual state is like, intrinsically mental and experienced as such. Here are two further reasons for maintaining such a distinct sense of the phrase. First, a sensory quality can be described in one’s public natural language, while what it is like to experience the quality seems to be ineffable. Suppose Ludwig asks Bertie, “How, exactly, does the after-image look to you as regards color?” Bertie replies, “I told you, it looks green.” “Yes,” says Ludwig, “but can you tell me what it’s like to experience that ‘green’ look?” “Well, the image looks the same color as that,” says Bertie, pointing to George Edward’s cloth coat. “No, I mean, can you tell me what it’s like intrinsically, not comparatively?” “Um,….” —In one way, Bertie can describe the phenomenal color, paradigmatically as “green.” But when asked what it is like to experience that green, he goes mute. So there is a difference between (a) “what it’s like” in the bare sense of the quality, the phenomenal color that can be described using ordinary color words, and (b) “what it’s like” to experience that phenomenal color, the WIL property, which cannot easily be described in public natural language at all. Second, Armstrong (1968), Nelkin (1989), Rosenthal (1991), and Lycan (1996) have argued that sensory qualities can fail to be conscious in the earlier sense of awareness; a quality can occur without its being even slightly noticed by its subject. But in such a case, there is a good sense in which it would not be like anything for the subject to experience that quality. (Of course, in the first, Dretske-Tye sense there would be something it was like, since the quality itself is that. But in another sense, if the subject is entirely unaware of the quality, it is odd even to speak of the subject as “experiencing” it, much less of there being something it is like for the subject to experience it.) So even in the case in which one is aware of one’s quality, the second type of “what it’s like,” the WIL property, requires awareness and so is something distinct from the quality itself. It is the second sense of “what it’s like” that figures in anti-materialist arguments from subjects’ “knowing what it’s like,” primarily Nagel’s (1974) “Bat” argument and Jackson’s (1982) “Knowledge” argument, Chalmers’ (1996, 2003) Conceivability argument, and Levine’s (1983, 2001) Explanatory Gap arguments. To begin with the first of those: Jackson’s character Mary, a brilliant color scientist trapped in an entirely black-and-white laboratory, nonetheless becomes omniscient as regards the physics and chemistry of color, the neurophysiology of color vision, and every other public, objective fact conceivably relevant to human color experience. Yet when she is finally released from her captivity and ventures into the outside world, she sees colors for the first time, and learns something: namely, she learns what it is like to see red and the other colors. Thus she seems to have learned a new fact, one that by hypothesis is not a public, objective fact. It is an intrinsically perspectival fact. This is what threatens materialism, since according to that doctrine, every fact about every human mind is ultimately a public, objective fact. Upon her release, Mary has done two things: She has at last hosted a red sensory quality, and she has learned what it is like to experience a red quality. In experiencing it she has experienced a “what it’s like” in the first of our two senses. But the fact she has learned has the ineffability characteristic of our second sense of “what it’s like”; were Mary to try to pass on her new knowledge of a WIL property to a still color-deprived colleague, she would not be able to express it in English. We have already surveyed the representational theory of sensory qualities. But there are also representational theories of “what it’s like” in the second sense (4). A common reply to the arguments of Nagel and Jackson (Horgan (1984), Van Gulick (1985), Churchland (1985), Tye (1986), Lycan (1987, 1990, 1996, 2003), Loar (1990), Rey (1991), Leeds (1993)) is to note that a knowledge difference does not entail a difference in fact known, for one can know a fact under one representation or mode of presentation but fail to know one and the same fact under a different mode of presentation. Someone might know that water is splashing but not know that H2O molecules are moving, and vice versa; someone might know that person X is underpaid without knowing that she herself is underpaid, even if she herself is in fact person X. Thus, from Mary’s before-and-after knowledge difference, Jackson is not entitled to infer the existence of a new, weird fact, but at most that of a new way of representing. Mary has not learned a new fact, but has only acquired a new, introspective or first-person way of representing one that she already knew in its neurophysiological guise. (As noted above, the posited introspective modes of presentation for sensory qualities in the first-order sense are strong candidates for the title of “qualia” in a distinct, higher-order sense of the term, and they may well be narrow rather than wide. This is what Rey (1998) seems to be talking about.) This attractive response to Nagel and Jackson—call it the “perspectivalist” response—requires that the first-order qualitative state itself be represented (else how could it be newly known under Mary’s new mode of presentation?). And that hypothesis in turn encourages a representational theory of higher-order conscious awareness and introspection. However, representational theories of awareness face powerful objections, the perspectivalist must either buy into such a theory despite its liabilities, or find some other way of explicating the idea of an introspective or first-person perspective without appealing to higher-order representation. The latter option does not seem promising. And a further question raised by the perspectivalist response concerns the nature of the alleged first-person representation itself. It has become popular, especially among materialists, to speak of “phenomenal concepts,”and to suppose that Mary has acquired one which she can now apply to her first-order qualitative state; it is in that way that she is able to represent the old fact in a new way. Phenomenal concepts figure also in responses to the Conceivability and Explanatory Gap arguments. The Conceivability argument (Chalmers 1996, 2003) has it that “zombies” are conceivable—physical duplicates of ordinary human beings, that share all the human physical and functional states but lack phenomenal consciousness in sense (4); there is nothing it is like to be a zombie. The argument then moves from bare conceivability to genuine metaphysical possibility, which would refute materialism. According to the Explanatory Gap argument (Levine 1983, 2001), no amount of physical, functional or other objective information could explain why a given sensory state feels to its subject in the way it does, and the best explanation of this in turn is that the feel is an extra fact that does not supervene on the physical. Lormand (2004) offers a very detailed linguistic analysis of the formula “There is something it is like for [creature] c to have [mental state] M,” and on its basis defends the claim that instances of that formula as well as more specific attributions of WIL properties can in fact be conceptually deduced at least from “nonphenomenal” facts about subjects. What the Knowledge, Conceivability and Explanatory Gap arguments have in common is that they move from an alleged epistemic gap to a would-be materialism-refuting metaphysical one. Though some materialists balk at once and refuse to admit the epistemic gap, more grant the epistemic gap and resist the move to the metaphysical one. The epistemic gap, on this view, is created by the “conceptual isolation” of phenomenal concepts from all others, and it is conceptual only rather than metaphysical. Stoljar (2005) calls this the “phenomenal concept strategy”. There are a number of distinct positive accounts of phenomenal concepts and how they work; such concepts are: “recognitional” (Loar (1990), Carruthers (2000), Tye (2003c)); proprietary lexemes of an internal monitoring system (Lycan (1996)); indexical (Perry (2001), O’Dea (2002), Schellenberg (2013)); demonstrative (Levin (2007), Stalnaker (2008), Schroer (2010)); “quotational” or “constitutive” (Papineau (2002), Balog (2012)); “unimodal” (Dove and Elpidorou (2016)). Some of those accounts are minimal, aspiring only to block the key inferences in the anti-materialist arguments aforementioned. Others, particularly the constitutive account, are more detailed and offer to explain more specific features of WIL properties.. For example, Papineau points out that the constitutive account explains the odd persistent attractiveness of some of the obviously fallacious antimaterialist arguments. He and Balog each argue that the account, according to which a phenomenal concept token is at least partly constituted by the very mental state-token that is its referent, explains the special directness of the reference: no feature of the state is appealed to (and a fortiori no neural, functional, causal etc. feature); Balog adds that since the referent is literally contained and present in the concept token, “there will always be something it is like” to do the tokening (p. 7). The phenomenal concept strategy is criticized by Raffman (1995), Stoljar (2005), Prinz (2007), Chalmers (2007), Ball (2009), Tye (2009), Demircioglu (2013), and Shea (2014). For further works and references see Alter and Walter (2007), Sundström (2011) and Elpidorou (2015). Chalmers offers a “Master Argument” meant to refute any version of the strategy: it is a dilemma based on whether it is conceivable that the complete fundamental physical truth holds yet we possess no phenomenal concepts (having whichever features). The argument is criticized by Papineau (2007), Carruthers and Veillet (2007), and Balog (2012). It is possible simply to deny the existence of WIL properties, as do Dennett (1991) and Dretske (1995); see also Humphrey (1992, 2011), Hall (2007), Pereboom (2011) and Tartaglia (2013). To do that is of course not to defend a representational theory or any other theory of them. But it would be good to explain away the majority belief in such properties, and some theorists do that in representational terms, arguing that other, real properties are misrepresented in introspection as WIL properties; Frankish (2016) calls this strategy “illusionism.” An obvious instance of such a misrepresentation would be to mistake a sensory quality for a WIL property; since the conflation of the two is already rife even among sophisticated philosophers, WIL deniers may suggest that what was introspected was only a sensory quality. (That is one way of understanding Dretske’s position, bar his resistance to the very notion of introspection as in Dretske (2003).) And as before, the phrase “what it’s like” has nontendentiously been used as referring to a sensory quality rather than to a property of a whole experience. Several authors point out that to reject WIL properties is not to grant Chalmers’ (1996) claim that for a zombie lacking WIL properties, “all is dark inside” (pp. 95–6). Rey (1992) suggests that introspection mistakes the lack of detail it delivers for the accurate representation of a simple ineffable property. Alternately or in addition (1995), having detected stable and identifiable complexes of involuntary responses to states of ourselves and to living creatures who look and behave like us, for example the commonsense causal, representational, conative and affective syndrome we lump together using the word ‘pain’, we project a simple quality onto the others and into ourselves. Rey and Pereboom each compare the projection of WIL properties into the mind by introspection to vision’s projection of simple homogeneous color properties onto environmental objects. Illusionism is criticized by Strawson (2006), Prinz (2016), Balog (2016), Nida-Rümelin (2016), Schwitzgebel (2016), and Chalmers (2018). Though highly sympathetic to illusionism, Kammerer (2018) argues that no previously existing account can explain the strength of the illusion. For general discussion, see the essays collected in Frankish (2017).