 Carnap differed fundamentally from the western philosophical tradition in his conception of philosophy and his attitude toward philosophical problems. These supposed problems, he thought, were largely artifacts of our inadequate tools—they originate in confusions due to the languages our species has evolved over millennia to deal with the practical problems of a pre-scientific and pre-technological everyday life. These primitive tools leave us unequipped even to express, let alone to address, the traditional problems of philosophy coherently; our inherited languages distort the picture too badly, and to see things more adequately we need to devise new concepts and organize our thoughts in less parochial categories. Just as we have devised new concepts and vocabularies to find out about the world in systematic scientific inquiry, so we have to leave behind our traditional ways of articulating how everything fits together, how we should understand our place in the world, and how we should shape our lives in response. So philosophical inquiry became, for Carnap, a kind of “conceptual engineering” (see Creath 1990, Flocke forthcoming-b) rather than a form of inquiry or search for knowledge. It did not ask how things are, in Carnap’s view, but rather how—within the constraints of our available tools and the knowledge available from the sciences—we want things to be. This form of “voluntarism” (Jeffrey 1992) lies at the basis of Carnap’s philosophy from beginning to end. Carnap applied this voluntaristic conceptual engineering in many different ways to many different problems, at different levels and on different scales. He applied it both within science and to larger problems about science (e.g., scientific language), or about the place of science in our lives. He applied it both to local reconstructions or explications of particular concepts (e.g., confirmation), and more globally, to entire language frameworks (see  section 1.2  below). And he wanted the local and global to fit together; precise definitions of explicated concepts were to be situated within such larger frameworks. The terminology evolved over the years. Carnap tended to think of his first engineering projects as “rational reconstruction”; later he favored the term “explication”. Both refer to the reconstruction or replacement of particular terms or concepts within our more primitive ordinary languages (or vestiges of them in scientific languages) rather than to the design and development of entire languages or language frameworks. There was a progressive change of emphasis over the course of Carnap’s career in the goals and the scope of this reconstructive engineering. In the early years Carnap (along with most of his colleagues in the 1920s Vienna Circle) saw these engineering projects in much the same light as the eighteenth-century Encyclopédistes and nineteenth-century positivists had seen them. Ordinary language and traditional concepts were to be overcome; they were to be replaced by better and more scientific ones. Later, Carnap’s view became more pluralistic and dialectical (Stein 1992); he increasingly recognized the practical nature of conceptual engineering and allowed more room for the standpoint of the language user, as well as the differing priorities and value systems involved in the choice of language frameworks or explications. Recently, Carnap’s idea of explication has attracted a good deal of attention (Maher 2007; Kitcher 2008; Carus 2007a; Dutilh Novaes & Reck 2017; Brun 2016; several papers in Wagner 2012), particularly among authors seeking to define the proper role of the new subdiscipline of experimental philosophy (Justus 2012; Shepherd & Justus 2015; Schupbach 2017) or of the methodology of mathematical philosophy (Leitgeb 2013). More details are to be found in the supplement on  Methodology.  (For more on conceptual engineering more generally, see, e.g., Cappelen 2018.) Explications or rational reconstructions were envisaged by Carnap as situated (where possible) in larger linguistic or conceptual frameworks, constructed object languages with a hierarchy of metalanguages in which to define and explore truth, analyticity, synonymity, designation and other semantic resources of the object language, and of the object language with respect to its extra-linguistic environment. Frameworks always involve logical consequence relation(s), their definition(s) of what follows from what logically. But this need not always mean that frameworks have purely logical object languages that are then provided with empirical interpretations. Other modes of inference employed in existing scientific disciplines, including conceptual inference, experimental procedures, and the reasoning from these, can also be reconstructed in or by frameworks. Carnap continued to hope that all of them could, eventually, be understood in more straightforwardly logical terms, but he realized that this was a long-term program and not immediately on the horizon. In particular, the framework could also come equipped with an inductive logic, where the deductive consequence relation for the object language is augmented by a numerical degree-of-confirmation assignment that satisfies the axioms of probability. In any case, Carnapian language or framework go beyond what we now mean by a formal language: they do not just involve a syntactic vocabulary and syntactic formation rules. From the modern logical point of view, a Carnapian framework is close to a logic or a formal theory (but perhaps with an interpretation), while from the philosophy of science point of view, a Carnapian framework is meant to reconstruct the conceptual and inferential presuppositions of a scientific theory rather than a scientific theory itself. Carnap’s earliest attempts to develop frameworks, which sought to encompass the conceptual resources of all empirical knowledge, can be found in Der logische Aufbau der Welt (1928a, The Logical Construction of the World), commonly referred to as the Aufbau, its abbreviated original German title. Carnap there focused on sketching a phenomenalist framework in which scientific concepts could be constructed from pure observation. The idea was to have a single framework relative to which any scientific sentence whatsoever (other than purely logical or mathematical ones) could be judged to be cashable or not cashable in empirical, observational terms. However, as Carnap soon realized, the framework failed to address theoretical scientific concepts, disposition concepts, or probabilistic concepts, among much else. The frameworks on which Carnap worked after this were less specific to particular epistemological problems, and more abstract and general. In his view, the specification of a framework was a prerequisite for any rational reconstruction of rational discourse whatsoever. As we will discuss in more detail below, his Logische Syntax der Sprache (1934, translated as The Logical Syntax of Language, 1937, hereafter LSS) worked out two different frameworks for mathematics (and physics) and developed a corresponding account of philosophy as the logical syntax of the language of science. Soon after, Carnap followed Alfred Tarski in making the basic concept of “truth” language-relative; and in 1950 he applied the same idea more explicitly to the basic concept of “existence”. It only made sense to speak of something “existing” relative to a framework (i.e., one could only speak of “existence” as internal to a framework), he said, not in any general sense (external to any framework whatever). This deflationary conception of truth and existence (and many other previously metaphysical concepts) again reflects Carnap’s resistance to the suggestive traps set by ordinary language and the philosophical tradition that has been too ready to fall into these traps. In his later work, Carnap extended his construction of semantic frameworks by developing frameworks in which probabilistic relations play a central role, including eventually frameworks for rational decision and action (decision theory). The specific details of Carnap’s various linguistic frameworks are discussed in the following supplements:  Aufbau (Section 1),  Logical Syntax of Language,  Semantics,  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories, and  Inductive Logic. Carnap differed from the philosophical tradition not only in his suspicion of ordinary language and its potentially misleading “philosophical” artifacts, and in his engineering impulse to replace our inherited languages by better-constructed and more precise constructed linguistic frameworks, but also in his increasingly pronounced pluralism among frameworks. In the Aufbau, Carnap had already discussed the availability of different frameworks (phenomenalist, physicalist, and more), and how they were more or less suitable for different purposes (see the supplement on  Aufbau).  But these frameworks still differed only in the choice of non-logical primitives and in the definition of non-primitive terms—the frameworks were still based on the same syntactic formation rules and on one and the same logical system. As far as the explicit endorsement of syntactic and logical pluralism and tolerance is concerned, the turning point came in 1932, while Carnap was writing his book (now often considered his masterpiece) Logical Syntax of Language. The starting point of that book, as we will see in more detail in  section 4  below, had been strongly motivated by the search for a single standard language of science. But this was now combined with Carnap’s new idea that, for philosophical statements about science, the standard of communicative acceptability should not (as in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus) be that it have meaning (that it picture some state of affairs), but that it be translatable into the “formal mode of speech”. His criterion for the scientific (non-metaphysical) status of a philosophical statement, that is, had shifted from the reducibility of a sentence to “atomic” observation sentences to its expressibility as a statement solely about linguistic artifacts (rather than about the supposed things and processes they refer to). But Carnap had still thought, until late 1932, that a single standard language for logical syntax could be found, and had invested a lot of time in devising such a language system. At that point, however, two sets of controversies attracted attention: the so-called “protocol sentence debate” about the correct form of observation sentences (and by implication, the role of observation in science), and the dispute about the foundations of mathematics among the three schools of logicism, intuitionism, and formalism. Both these controversies came to seem to Carnap, after years of involvement in each of them, to stumble over artifacts of inherited language just like the old philosophical problems the Vienna Circle thought it had swept away. He came to regard the different positions in these debates not as potentially “right” or “correct” (or “wrong” or “incorrect”) but as different proposals for language frameworks in which to frame the questions, different ways of articulating the problems surrounding empirical evidence and the nature of mathematics, respectively. And it seemed to him that these proposals were mostly not mutually exclusive; on the contrary, he came to think that many different alternative languages should be pursued and developed to see how well they perform in different contexts. He saw them as motivated by different needs and requirements, perhaps by different ultimate values, and he thought the discussion of values should not be confused with the study and development of the language frameworks themselves: “in logic”, he famously wrote in the Syntax (LSS: §17), “there are no morals”. This new pluralism undermined the initial premise of the Syntax book on which he was working then, but Carnap nonetheless took it on board. The language he had initially been intending to propose as the single standard language of science was now used simply as an example, and to be sure that it wasn’t taken too prescriptively Carnap also developed another language (Dr.-Seuss-like, he called them “Language I” and “Language II”), and stressed that both were acceptable, though each had its strengths and weaknesses for different purposes. The new linguistic pluralism was stated as the principle of tolerance: we are not in the business of setting up prohibitions but of arriving at conventions… In logic there are no morals. Everyone is welcome to set up his logic, i.e., his form of language, as he pleases. If he wants to discuss it with us, though, he needs to state his intentions clearly, and give syntactical specifications rather than philosophical debates. (LSS: §17) This principle would remain a permanent, indeed the dominant, component of Carnap’s philosophy for the rest of his career. For more details on Carnapian tolerance, see the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology (Sections 1 and 2). Why, under this pluralism, should some statements and expressions still be excluded, as not having any content, as not conveying anything but as being just empty verbiage that purports to say something significant? Why, that is, should “metaphysics” still be excluded, as Carnap notoriously insisted? Surely the metaphysician is as free as anyone else to choose her language? These questions take us back to the engineering ethos described in  section 1.1  above, about explication and rational reconstruction. Language choice, for Carnap, was not an end in itself but was rather in the service of freeing ourselves from the distorted perspective on the world imposed on us by our inherited natural languages. These languages had not evolved to optimize the transparent representation of knowledge, but for very different, primitive practical purposes. For the pursuit of knowledge, and insight into the human condition in the light of that knowledge, better languages are needed. What makes a language “better”? In principle Carnap leaves that open. Everyone has their own values about what they want languages to do for them, and will choose accordingly. But Carnap’s own values were those of the Enlightenment. His value hierarchy placed the value of escaping from the complacent, passive acceptance of authority, or of traditional or folk ideas—and finding something objectively better—near the top. The replacement of knowledge accepted passively from authority or tradition by objective knowledge was his goal just as it had been the goal of the Encyclopédistes. And by “objective” knowledge, Carnap meant essentially scientific and practical knowledge, just as they did. This did not mean a rejection of the humanistic tradition, or of dimensions to values other than the scientific and engineering-oriented. Carnap took entirely for granted (so deeply that he hardly ever bothered to make it explicit) that literature, art, and music shaped people’s values and were closely connected with them. But these were for individuals to negotiate. Since his experience of the First World War, he had realized that the German intelligentsia’s political indifference, its overindulgence in humanistic individual values, had been partly to blame for the war. He had resolved, therefore, to attend more to the framework that all humans shared, and that formed the basis for their social and political cohabitation. Objective knowledge was, to him as to the Enlightenment, at the core of this shared framework. Practical (especially political) decisions should be informed ones, arrived at in the light of the best possible knowledge about the available choices and their consequences. Metaphysics was, in his view, a distraction from this program. Metaphysics was a kind of failed art form masquerading as knowledge, so it was both fake art and fake knowledge. Unlike a logical or mathematical proof or the confirmation of a scientific theory, metaphysical proposals are unable to command widespread agreement; even the criteria by which they should be judged are often in dispute. On the other hand, all of Carnap’s repeated attempts, over several decades, to give a precise delineation—to explicate the distinction—between scientific (or meaningful or communicatively adequate) statements and metaphysical (non-scientific, non-meaningful) ones failed. He therefore became more liberal and less exacting about what was to be regarded as metaphysical. He was willing to allow that many metaphysical theories of past philosophers (he cites Aristotle, Leibniz, Kant, Peirce, and Whitehead, among others) could be regarded as useful steps toward the construction of “the most general frameworks containing categorial concepts which are fundamental for the representation of all knowledge”, and moreover that he himself regarded this task as among “the most important problems of philosophy” (Carnap 1963b: 862). See the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology (Section 2 and 3)  for further detail. Carnap’s life-long quest to explicate the distinction between statements that genuinely convey something and empty verbiage that only purports to say something (metaphysics) began with Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, the Vienna Circle’s provisional starting point. The Circle interpreted Wittgenstein as requiring what Carnap later called a “molecular” language, by which he meant a language that permitted only finitely restricted quantification. This posed an obvious problem in that scientific theories, the very paradigm of what the Circle regarded as proper (non-metaphysical) knowledge, nearly all contain unrestricted universal quantifiers and thus range, in principle, over an infinite number of instances. As Carnap already acknowledged in his first writings on the subject, well before Popper appeared on the scene, this meant that theories could not, strictly speaking, be verified; they could only be confirmed up to a certain confidence level, or disconfirmed (e.g., Carnap 1926: 7–9). As we will see in  section 5  below, this and related problems constituted a large part of the Circle’s agenda during the late 1920s and early 1930s. The important thing to keep in mind through all this is that “the verification principle” in its crude form was never advocated by Carnap or any other major figure in the Circle. (More detail on this in the supplement on  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Section 1).)  In the Aufbau, Carnap had, it is true, worked out a finitist, “molecular” phenomenalist language and advocated the epistemological benefits of reconstructing scientific concepts on its basis. During this period, he was attracted to a form of radical positivism that played down theories as mere auxiliary devices for the prediction of observations. The observations that confirm theories, in this view, was really all there was to science, in what amounted to a kind of instrumentalism about theories, as it would later be called. But soon afterwards, in his Logical Syntax, and more explicitly when he published “Testability and Meaning” in 1936–37, Carnap decisively distanced himself from such doctrines. In the light of the new principle of tolerance, the obsession with just one standard language form seemed unnecessarily “absolutist” and rigid. In “Testability and Meaning” it is stressed that many different language forms are possible in science and should be investigated, and that none is “correct” or uniquely acceptable for the purposes of scientific confirmation. The point is to devise languages that meet certain goals of inquiry better than others, in the awareness that some languages may be better for the pursuit of one goal, while other languages are preferable for other goals. This is perhaps the first fully explicit expression of the engineering ethos described in section 1.1 above. This period also marks a return to the recognition that radical positivism of the “molecular” or Tractatus sort hardly does justice to actual science—so Carnap returns now to science as it actually is done rather than an idealized, purely factual science. This meant, once again, an acceptance that theoretical vocabulary needed to be accounted for in one’s conception of science. Another kind of concept characteristic of actually practiced science that gets special attention in “Testability and Meaning” is disposition concepts (e.g., “soluble” or “refrangible”; more on disposition concepts in the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Section 2)).  Probabilistic concepts would soon come into focus as well as a significant preoccupation. From this period, then, Carnap once again focused on scientific theories, and on theoretical languages as not fully reducible to empirical observation sentences. While he had given up the effort to reduce theories to observations, he remained preoccupied with the complementary problems of how a theory can be confirmed by observations, and how the empirical content of a theory can be determined. Both of these problems were articulated, and seen as interrelated, in “Testability and Meaning”, but thereafter they took separate paths. The first of these problems was central to Carnap’s preoccupation with inductive logic from about 1942, though he was never able to develop it to the point where it could be applied to the confirmation of theoretical sentences (as opposed to mere empirical generalizations). The second problem was the focus of significant attention to the nature of theoretical languages and the degree to which theories are constrained by evidence, as well as the problem how to identify the analytic and synthetic parts of a theoretical hypothesis or a theory, i.e., to distinguish what components of it come with the language framework in which it is expressed, and what components contain actual information about the world. See sections  8.1  and  8.3  below on Carnap’s further pursuit of both problems and his controversies and interactions with Popper, Hempel, and others on these issues. The supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Sections 3 and 4)  deals in more detail with Carnap’s distinction between observation language and theoretical language in science, and with Carnap’s reconstruction of scientific theories and theoretical terms by means of Ramsey sentences and related logical resources. His own primary attention during the later years of his career was to inductive logic, where he began by distinguishing two fundamentally different explicanda of the concept “probability”: (i) the idea of probability as relative frequency of some occurrence in a series of events or in a population, which he regarded as a legitimate and entirely empirical matter. He contrasted it with (ii) probability understood as an epistemic measure of our certainty or uncertainty about the empirical truth or adequacy of a statement. The latter was Carnap’s focus; at the outset he worked out a structural and logical conception of epistemic probability, influenced by Waismann and Keynes, as further explained in the supplement  Inductive Logic,  and progressed over the years toward a more “personalist” view, though never giving up the logical conception entirely. He worked closely with various students and associates on these problems, especially Richard Jeffrey, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and John Kemeny. See  section 8.2  below, see the supplement  Inductive Logic  for the details of his structural account of probability, and see the supplement  Methodology (Section 1)  for his probabilistic explication(s) of inductive confirmation. Ray J. Solomonoff’s work on universal inductive inference was also triggered by Carnap’s inductive logic. (Solomonoff studied with Carnap in Chicago. See Sterkenburg 2018 for a discussion and evaluation.) Another strand of Carnap’s indifference to ontology was his lifelong focus on structures as the main objects of knowledge. Even as early as 1922, Carnap had thought that mathematics, correctly understood, is not so much the study of quantity and number as the study of structures; Kant’s dictum that something is scientific just insofar as it is mathematical was now superseded, he thought, by his new dictum that something is scientific just insofar as it is structural (Carnap 1922b: p. cl[r], translated and quoted in Carus 2007a: 163). And if the object of our knowledge is not the particular or the qualitative but the structural, then, as Hermann Weyl had said, “A science can determine its subject matter only up to an isomorphic representation”. In particular, it is altogether indifferent toward the “essence” of its objects of study…It is mysticism to expect of scientific knowledge that it reveal—to acquaintance—a deeper essence than that openly available to acquaintance. The conception of isomorphism pinpoints the unquestionable and ineluctable limit to knowledge. (Weyl 1926: 22 [1947: 25–26]) Weyl speaks here in the language of axiomatic systems and their structurally identical—isomorphic—models, a language largely articulated at the beginning of the twentieth century by David Hilbert. But Hilbert had only made more precise the notions of structuralism that went further back and had animated a great deal of nineteenth-century mathematics (see Schiemer 2013), culminating in the group-theoretic (algebraic) understanding of the new non-Euclidean geometries and Felix Klein’s celebrated “Erlanger Programm” for the unification of geometry by this means, which also inspired the early Bertrand Russell. Russell himself, and before him Gottlob Frege and Richard Dedekind, had given “top-down” definitions of structural concepts by means of higher-order logical quantifiers (as in Frege’s 1879 famous definition of the ancestral of a relation in his Begriffsschrift, or in Dedekind’s 1888 definition of simply infinite system in his Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?, or in Whitehead and Russell’s 1910–1913 Principia Mathematica), all of which influenced Carnap significantly. An equally important influence, at about the same time as Klein, was the epistemological structuralism of Hermann von Helmholtz. Carnap was clearly inspired by these ideas, not only in his earliest work, but all through his career, even into his work on probability and induction, as we will see below  (section 8). Carnap is best known, though, for his application of structuralism first to epistemology, in the Aufbau, and then to mathematics itself, in the Syntax and later work, as well as to mathematically formulated scientific theories. The frameworks discussed in section 1.2 above were always structural ones, in which Carnap invariably abstracted from the actual instantiation of the structures in question in actual languages or conceptual systems, with the result that even some of his closest allies and associates misunderstood him, including (among others) Russell, Neurath, Popper, and Quine (see  sections 3  through 8 below for details). The articulation of these structural frameworks is discussed in the supplements  Aufbau,  Logical Syntax of Language,  Semantics,  and  Reconstruction of Scientific Theories. Carnap’s structuralism about mathematics also points forward, in its anticipation, for instance, of Tarski’s structural delimitation of logic modeled on the Erlanger Programm (Tarski 1986, Sher 1991), and has recently been seen as a precursor of a new form of mathematical structuralism based on homotopy type theory in its emphasis on invariance (Awodey 2017). From the Aufbau (see the supplement  Aufbau (Section 2)  on Carnap’s early structuralism) to his mature reconstruction of scientific theories (see the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Section 6)  on Carnap’s later structuralism), Carnap sought to articulate an innovative type of conceptual or linguistic structuralism about science that is metaphysically neutral and which resembles modern versions of structuralism about mathematics: the cognitive content of what can be asserted precisely and meaningfully in science can be reconstructed as a structural constraint on empirical content, and one should aim at such structural reconstructions as they enhance the objectivity of science. While structural properties are expressed using logical concepts usually discussed in the context of deductive logic, Carnap’s later work on inductive logic considers probability measures that are logical or structural in the analogous sense, i.e., where probabilities remain invariant under isomorphisms. This “inductive structuralism” is discussed in supplement  Inductive Logic. Carnap is not generally known for his (very sparse) publications about values, but what he did publish is sufficient (in conjunction with recently published texts) to yield a fairly accurate insight into his thinking, which turns out to be sufficiently original to have significant potential for further development. Carnap’s main publication on values is the final (and longest) chapter of his replies to critics in the Schilpp volume (the Reply to Kaplan, Carnap 1963b). On the basis of this text, Carnap has generally been classified simply as an (ethical) non-cognitivist. And there is a close resemblance between Carnap’s proposed logic of normative statements (“optatives”, Carnap calls them) and that of Richard Hare (1954) published at about the time Carnap’s reply was written (though it was not published until 1963). The term “non-cognitivist” to describe the view that normative statements cannot be true or false (and that therefore no “ought” can be derived from an “is”, as Hume had put it), was, in fact, proposed by Carnap—one of his more widely-accepted (if low-profile) coinages. However, it had been assumed that since Carnap required a framework to be in place for any kind of rational discourse to be possible, the choice of frameworks itself must be simply a matter of personal whim, at the level of Hume’s declaration that there is no rational argument for me to prefer the relief of a pain in my little toe to the prevention of some world-engulfing catastrophe. This problem of the irrationality of framework choice (George 2012) or—put another way—the supposed infinite regress in the selection of meta-frameworks for the choice of framework (Richardson 2007; Steinberger 2016; Carus 2017) has been discussed recently from various angles. It is a special case, in the way Carnap is still usually seen, of the supposedly more general impossibility, for Carnap, of bringing reason to bear on normative choices, since in his view all reasoning seems to presuppose internality to a framework. But from an interpretive viewpoint, this was clearly an unsatisfactory position, since Carnap had in fact from his earliest days used reasoning to argue for normative positions, and continued to do so all his life. So there seemed to be a tension, at such a basic level that one would surely think Carnap must or should have been aware of it. In fact, there is no tension, as it turns out that Carnap (at least in his later years and probably for much of his career) held a quasi-Kantian view whereby the logical reasoning we employ in mathematics, logic, and science (including inductive logic and decision theory) is conceived as subordinate to (and narrower in scope than) a purely normative form of reasoning—in Kantian terms, Verstand (understanding) is subordinate to (and narrower than) Vernunft (reason). So at least it appears from a recently published fragmentary draft Carnap wrote in 1958 of a continuation of or sequel to the reply to Kaplan about values that had appeared in the Schilpp volume (Carnap 2017); see the supplement  Tolerance, Metaphysics, and Meta-Ontology  for further discussion. More recent forms of normative non-cognitivism have recast their doctrines somewhat to describe them as “expressivist” (Blackburn 1993; Gibbard 1990). From this starting point Huw Price (1988) has sought to generalize expressivism to include not only normative language but other kinds as well. In some more recent expositions of this proposed globalized expressivism or “functional pluralism” (Price 1997; see also Creath 1994 on the sense on which Carnap’s view can be called “functionalist”), he invokes Carnap’s conception of mathematics as the exemplar on which he proposes to model his approach to all sectors of language; he calls this the “Carnap thesis”, and assigns it fundamental importance in the development of a new “global expressivism” as he also calls his position (Price 2013, 2018). In view of the discussion above, it would seem that Carnap himself had already generalized his functionalist “Carnap thesis” regarding mathematics to at least values and possibly also to other sectors of language (Carus 2018; Price 2018). This is also consistent with the new-found interest in Carnap’s “inferentialism” (Peregrin 2011, forthcoming; Chalmers 2012), discussed further in  section 5  below. Perhaps, in some respects, current philosophy is beginning to catch up to Carnap. (General surveys of Carnap’s work can be found in, e.g., Mormann 2000, Friedman and Creath 2007.)