 Carnap was born on 18 May 1891 in the small town of Ronsdorf, now part of Wuppertal, an industrial city near the Ruhr area of northwestern Germany. His mother was a schoolteacher, and her father, Friedrich Wilhelm Dörpfeld (1824–93), had been a leading educator and educational thinker in the Herbartian tradition. Carnap was home-schooled by his mother until secondary school, and brought up religious, but the emphasis was on the ethical, rather than the doctrinal, dimensions of religious life. As a result, Carnap said, he had no crisis of conscience when he later abandoned any belief in God or the supernatural. In 1908 the family moved to Jena, into the house of another famous relative, Carnap’s maternal uncle Wilhelm Dörpfeld (son of Friedrich Wilhelm), a well-known and highly influential archaeologist. Apart from trips to Greece with his uncle, Carnap finished secondary school in Jena and enrolled in the university there, studying philosophy, physics, and mathematics, vaguely intending to become a high-school science teacher. At the University of Jena he soon encountered the “Sera Circle”, an offshoot of the Youth Movement that swept Germany in the years before World War I. He became enthralled with the idea, as he later said, that social forms and behavioral standards did not have to be assimilated uncritically from the surrounding society, or from tradition, but could be freely invented. The “voluntarism” that suffuses every phase of his later philosophical career (Jeffrey 1992) seems to have had its origins here. He became not only an enthusiastic participant in the Youth Movement but also a leader, representing the Jena branch at the climactic national meeting of local Youth Movement groups at the Hoher Meißner in 1913 (Werner 2003). Carnap’s first exposure to logic came from an obscure and reclusive professor of mathematics at Jena, Gottlob Frege. Carnap was so fascinated that he took every course Frege offered (including two courses on Frege’s Begriffsschrift and a course on Logic in Mathematics). His resulting shorthand notes are sufficiently detailed to permit a reconstruction of Frege’s response after the system of the Grundgesetze had been undermined by Russell’s paradox (Reck & Awodey 2005). It would be another decade, though, before Carnap came to see Frege’s logic as the key to a new way of doing philosophy. Carnap also studied with neo-Kantians and Lebensphilosophen, including Bruno Bauch (whose course on Kant’s First Critique left a lasting impression), Herman Nohl (a student of Dilthey) and—while in Freiburg for a semester—Heinrich Rickert, whose lectures Carnap was particularly enthusiastic about. The war interrupted this development. Carnap and his Youth Movement friends, though hardly enthralled, felt they could not shirk their duty to serve. Carnap spent most of 1914–17 at the front (first the eastern, then the western), and took part in some of the bloodiest engagements. In 1917 he was wounded, awarded the Iron Cross, and spent the remainder of the war at a radio research facility in Berlin. He also became politically active: he joined the (by then anti-war) Independent Socialist Party, circulated excerpts from the world press, mostly critical of the German government, to friends with his comments (Werner 2015), and participated in the transformation of the Youth Movement (or parts of it) into a political force. He teamed up with Karl Bittel, another Youth Movement leader, to start the underground Political Circular, a newsletter for university Youth Movement adherents that appeared irregularly during the months immediately preceding the German Revolution of 1918. In the first issue, Carnap reviewed two books on proposals for worldwide political union (Carnap 1918a). He also prepared for publication a much longer and more detailed analysis of the entire political situation following Germany’s military defeat, but the Revolution occurred just as it was to be published, and it never appeared. (See the editors’ introduction to Carnap 2019; it has now been published, along with other early Carnap manuscripts, in Damböck, Sandner, & Werner forthcoming.) Carnap’s newfound political orientation was a non-Marxist libertarian socialism of a kind represented by Gustav Landauer (1870–1919), a writer much admired by both Bittel and Carnap (Carnap 1919: 124, as described in Carus 2007a: 59). What is most striking about Carnap’s unpublished analysis of the German situation after the defeat, though, is how unpolitical it remains, in any literal sense. He certainly deplores the unwillingness of educated Germans to dirty their hands with politics, and urges a fundamental change in attitude, balancing the exclusive German emphasis on the contemplative life with greater involvement in the active life. However, what Carnap calls “politics” in this analysis is “everything… that has some connection with the public social life of people”—which, as he makes quite explicit, includes practically all human activities, including some very ivory-tower ones. Indeed, the key to his advocacy of greater “political involvement” is that he assigns intellectual work a central and indispensable role in arriving at the “form of community [Gemeinschaftsgestalt]” that could serve to coordinate the vast and heterogeneous multitude of tasks and jobs that have “some connection with the public social life of people”. Only by virtue of such a “form of community” can we hope to remove this otherwise anarchic hive of activities from the realm of chaotic whim and subordinate them to goal-oriented reason [der choatischen Willkür zu entziehen und der zielbewußten Vernunft zu unterwerfen]. (Carnap 1918b: 17–18, translated and quoted in Carus 2007a: 63) For Carnap the basis for “goal-oriented reason” could only be a comprehensive system of knowledge, and this exhortation to remove the design of our system of the sciences “from the realm of chaotic whim”, and to “subordinate” it to “goal-oriented reason” reverberates throughout his early philosophical papers (e.g., Carnap 1923: 107), which have now been published together with English translations in Carnap (2019). In the editors’ introduction to this new edition it is argued that this program was not just a momentary response to a particular crisis, but continued to inform the architectonic of Carnap’s philosophy throughout its development. This is hardly disputed with respect to the immediately following stages of Carnap’s career, addressing the nature and design of the system of knowledge—his dissertation on philosophical problems of space and geometry, Der Raum (1922a) and other early papers. Der Raum [Space] prefigures later works in its effort to disentangle various meanings of the word “space” and to show that philosophical confusion had resulted from the failure to distinguish them clearly. In this case, Carnap distinguishes “formal”, “intuitive”, and “physical” space. The first was a purely logical or set-theoretic construction of space; the second was built up from a version of Hilbert’s axioms restricted to a local, subjective space; the third was the space of physics. In each case, by separate arguments, Carnap reaches the conclusion that the space we must assume as the precondition for any knowledge is not Euclidean space, as Kant had argued (and some Kantians such as Natorp were still arguing), nor even any metric space, but topological space of arbitrarily many dimensions. While this represents a form of (neo-)Kantianism Carnap would soon leave behind, it was tempered by the critical role of the “factual basis [Tatbestand]” in deciding among mathematically possible kinds of physical space. The factual basis was determined only up to the topological relations among its elements; Carnap’s residual Kantianism is expressed in the topologically “necessary form” (not reaching to metrical relations) our perception imposes on its elements (see Heis 2011 on the neo-Kantian background in the philosophy of geometry). A series of notes taken during this period exhibit Carnap’s preoccupation with the question how the system of knowledge could, unlike the proposals of Diderot and d’Alembert in the Encyclopédie and those in its wake such as Comte’s and Ostwald’s (1914a, 1914b), be unified deductively, as Leibniz—and Frege—had envisaged (on Ostwald as a starting point for Carnap during this period, see Dahms 2016). What especially preoccupied the young Carnap was the challenge of giving the system empiricist underpinnings, i.e., finding deductive relations between sense perceptions and the abstract concepts of the advanced sciences. For a year or two he struggled with this problem without success, until finally, in early 1922, just before the publication of Der Raum, Carnap read Bertrand Russell’s Our Knowledge of the External World (1914). Here he found his answer—the concepts were to be derived not by analysis of experience, and deduction from the resulting elements, but by construction, using a “principle of abstraction” (Russell 1914a: 44–45; see also Pincock 2002). Experiences could be gathered into equivalence classes, and for purposes of constructing a “real” world, each such class can be regarded as a concept, defined by its extension. Immediate, momentary experience—the basis for knowledge among positivists, phenomenologists, as well as fictionalists such as the German philosopher Hans Vaihinger—need not be transcended in such a construction. The hitherto insurmountable problem of forcing the fluid character of lived experience into the straitjacket of deductive relations disappears. This move also overcame another traditional positivist and phenomenological obstacle to Carnap’s project of a Leibnizian, deductive system of knowledge, formulated most drastically by Hans Vaihinger (who influenced Carnap in this regard): the “chaos” of subjective experience, as we immediately experience it, has no structure whatever. Nothing is really “given” but the undifferentiated chaos itself. No distinguishable “elements” present themselves as naturally isolable from it or as inherently available, without externally imposed fictions. Russell’s principle of abstraction—his method of substituting “logical constructions for inferred entities” (such as qualities)—solved this problem, but with the addition of a small but indispensable contribution from phenomenology. What enabled Carnap to obtain the elements he sought without isolating identifiable elements within the undifferentiated “chaos” was a single act of phenomenological discernment: a partition of the entire “chaos” into just two sectors, which he called the “living” and “dead” components of experience. This one distinction allowed Carnap to arrange experiences into a temporal sequence (“dead” experience is past; “living” experience present), making it possible to identify holistic temporal cross-sections of experience, in which the total experience of a given specious present remains intact as a momentary whole. This chronological sequence of experiential time-slices now gave Carnap the basic framework he needed for identifying qualities as cross-temporal equivalence classes of discernable persistences across series of adjacent specious presents. These holistic time-slices did not need to be analysed. Qualities and qualitative relations could, rather, be constructed as something like equivalence classes of sufficiently “similar” persistences across a series of adjacent time-slices (up to any desired degree of precision in “similarity”). The result was that what empiricists such as Hume or Mach had always hoped to achieve by “analysis of the sensations” could be achieved without analysis. Carnap called it “quasianalysis” (which is explained in more detail in the supplement  Methodology (Section 3)).  Physical objects could be constructed as connected classes of qualities, and from objects the path to a “reality” seemed clear. In this early stage of what became the Aufbau project, Carnap still followed Vaihinger in distinguishing sharply between the direct, genuine, first-hand knowledge of the “chaos” and the fictive, constructed nature of “reality”. But he put the boundary between them in a different place. This was because Husserl’s phenomenology offered an escape route from Vaihinger’s completely undifferentiated chaos. It yielded certain distinctions within the chaos (e.g., between “living” and “dead” experience) that could claim a degree of objectivity. These distinctions, Carnap then thought, were not fictional, but actually extended the range of what could be genuinely known, even without fictions, just from the chaos itself. So Carnap’s boundary between the immediately known primary world (of sensory “chaos” plus a minimal, phenomenologically extrapolated structure) and a fictive secondary world of “reality” included more in the “primary” sector than Vaihinger’s. Carnap thought he could show on phenomenological grounds that the primary world is two-dimensional in all sense modalities (Carnap 1924). So the boundary between the fixed primary world and the freely choosable secondary worlds (“realities”) was located at the ascent from two to three dimensions. Within the primary world, the construction proceeded entirely by explicit definition, beginning from the qualities obtained by quasianalysis. Secondary worlds, by contrast, are not uniquely determined. The construction of a secondary world proceeds, rather, by optimizing its fit to whichever fictions are chosen to guide the construction, subject to the constraint of the (fixed) primary world. Carnap remained as radically pragmatist about the choice among fictions to guide this ascent as Vaihinger; the choice of fictions was entirely practical and purpose-relative. (For more on Vaihinger’s account of fictions, see, e.g., Chapter 1 of Appiah 2017.) To obtain the scientific secondary world, Carnap maintained, we need only two fictions, corresponding roughly to Kant’s categories of cause and substance: a principle of induction (or uniformity of nature) and a principle of “continuity” (as Mach had called it), requiring certain clusters of perceptions, such as those grouped into a “physical object”, to remain constant, under certain conditions, while we are not perceiving them. Sometime during 1924, the Aufbau project changed course drastically, and arrived at essentially its later published form (Carus 2016). The phenomenological approach to the basis was dropped; a fixed “primary world” was no longer to be distinguished by phenomenological intimation from the various “secondary worlds” built upon it. Russell’s “construction principle”, as Carnap called it, came to dominate the project, and would become the book’s epigraph: The supreme maxim in scientific philosophizing is this: Wherever possible, logical constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities. (B. Russell 1914a: 155) So now the two-dimensionality of perceptual space, for instance, is no longer obtainable from phenomenological discernment, but becomes as much a logical construction as everything else ( Aufbau: §§89, 117, 124). And in a talk Carnap gave about the Aufbau project in Vienna in January 1925, we find a new guiding principle: “Overcoming subjectivity” (Carnap 1925a, 1925b, as quoted in Carus 2007a: 168; 2016). After completing the Aufbau first draft in late 1925, along these new lines, Carnap left for Vienna, where he became a lecturer [Privatdozent] and submitted the Aufbau manuscript to Moritz Schlick as his Habilitationsschrift. He immediately became an active participant in Schlick’s weekly Circle, which was embarking just then on yet another careful re-reading of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. This group would soon (due to Otto Neurath’s effective propaganda) become known to the world as the “Vienna Circle”, the fount of a new (anti-)philosophy known as “logical positivism”—a term Carnap never liked. Like others in the Vienna Circle, Carnap saw the Tractatus as a basis for solving the perennial problem of accommodating the truths of logic and mathematics to empiricism. Wittgenstein was no empiricist, but his characterization of logical truth as a pure artifact of representation, empty of empirical significance, gave the Vienna Circle what they needed. Their logicism extended Wittgenstein’s truth-functional conception of logic to the whole of mathematics, and their empiricism interpreted Wittgenstein’s atomic sentences as sense perceptions, along the lines of the Elementarerlebnisse at the basis of Carnap’s Aufbau. This version of Wittgenstein made mathematics consistent with empiricism. However, its weaknesses were obvious even to the Circle: First, from the empiricist perspective of the Vienna Circle, Wittgenstein’s truth-functional conception of logic seemed to require finitism; even the most abstract theories of physics could then employ only restricted, finitary quantification rather than unrestricted quantification over a potentially infinite number of observations ( Aufbau: §180; Carnap 1936–37: §23). And second, Wittgenstein’s exclusion of “elucidations” (meta-sentences about the object sentences framed in the language of science) was not only paradoxical (it made all statement and discussion of logical principles meaningless) but seemed at odds with recent developments in the foundations of mathematics, especially Hilbert’s metamathematics, and the brilliant use made of this approach by Skolem, Tarski, and by one of Carnap’s own students, Kurt Gödel. (In turn, Gödel’s arithmetization of syntax and his incompleteness theorems would have an enormous impact on Carnap’s Logical Syntax of Language just a few years later—see the supplement on  Logical Syntax of Language  for more details.) Carnap set to work, after his arrival in Vienna, to solve these two problems. He embarked on a major project to explore “general axiomatics”, in which he sought to show that Hilbertian axiomatics could be accommodated within the Wittgensteinian representational framework—i.e., he sought to show that the Hilbertian “method of bifurcation”, (into metalanguage and object language), while mathematically useful, could ultimately be reduced to a Wittgensteinian single language. The immediate goal was to prove a fundamental completeness theorem, purporting to show that a consistent axiom system is categorical just in case it is decidable (Awodey & Carus 2001). After three years of concentrated work on this project (a substantial manuscript of several hundred pages survives in Carnap’s papers), Alfred Tarski convinced him that this theorem was defective, and that Carnap’s attempt to work within a single language failed to capture the metamathematical concepts fully (but see Schiemer 2013). And late in 1930, Gödel actually showed that an important special case of Carnap’s theorem was false: second-order arithmetic, though categorical, is not decidable. This famous result put an end to Carnap’s project of fusing Hilbert and Wittgenstein.