 Carnap’s first sketch of a linguistic framework (that of the Aufbau) envisaged complete reducibility of all concepts by explicit definition, at least in principle. By the time of “Testability and Meaning” (1936–37), as we saw above, Carnap had conceded that such definitional reducibility is not always possible, and suggested various forms of incomplete reducibility that, while not employing only explicit definitions, at least required of empirically meaningful sentences a clear grounding in observation. He considers verifiability as a criterion for empirical content or meaning, and rejects it for essentially the same reason as he had a decade previously (in Carnap 1926: 7–9). He also considers Popper’s falsifiability criterion, and rejects it because only sentences of a very particular logical form are falsifiable at all (such as, e.g., “all swans are white”). Indeed, most scientific theories (all theories that use limit concepts, for instance) have to be stated using unbounded multiple mixed quantifiers, e.g., “for all x there is a y such that \((\ldots x \ldots y\ldots)\)”, and there are instances of such sentences which can neither be verified nor falsified by a single observational counter-instance. In particular, to falsify such a statement there would have to be a counter-instance x to falsify an unbounded existentially quantified (empirical) sentence, which (as Popper himself acknowledged) is not generally possible. So in these cases, typical of theoretical science, falsifiability has no advantage over verifiability. (For a more precise discussion of falsifiability, see Schurz & Dorn 1988.) Carnap therefore opts neither for verification nor for falsification, but for a form of partial verification that he calls “confirmation”: If in the continued series of such testing experiments no negative instance is found but the number of positive instances increases, then our confidence in the law will grow step by step. Thus, instead of verification, we may speak of gradually increasing confirmation of the law. (TM1: 425) The acceptance or rejection of a scientific hypothesis becomes partially a practical matter, and to some degree a matter of convention. Carnap speaks in this connection of the “degree of confirmation” but means this not in a quantitative but merely “topological” (what he would later call “comparative”) sense. He specifically rejects Reichenbach’s proposal to equate degree of confirmation to “the degree of probability in the strict sense which this concept has in the calculus of probability, i.e., as the limit of relative frequency” (TM1: 427). Five years later Carnap would realize that the probability calculus could be given a different, epistemic interpretation as had been done historically by Bayes, Laplace, Pearson, and Keynes, and was now continued by Harold Jeffreys—and he would make that interpretation the basis of his remaining life’s work of developing quantitative explications of “degree of confirmation”. (For more details on Carnap’s work on confirmation and inductive logic, see the supplement  Inductive Logic.) Why did Carnap decide to change directions so radically, at the age of 52? This is unusual in a philosopher, especially as in Carnap’s case it involved reading his way into a whole new field of inquiry, as well as learning a whole new branch of mathematics. We know that the idea of a “degree of confirmation” had interested him since at least the time of “Testability and Meaning”. At this time, as we saw in  section 8.1  above, he thought it could be defined only comparatively, since he rejected Reichenbach’s conflation of truth-value with frequency as well as his identification of relative frequency and confirmation (Carnap 1935b, 1936–37). And it had been the accepted wisdom in the Vienna Circle that the classical (epistemic) interpretation of probability had been entirely superseded by the frequency interpretation, partly because the latter relied on Laplace’s much-criticized principle of indifference, which they classified as metaphysical. Even Keynes (1921) had given insufficiently clear arguments and his axioms were defective, they thought, but there was interest in Wittgenstein’s logical (purely analytic) conception of probability, suggested in the Tractatus, and developed in more detail by Waismann (1930). Then in 1937, right after “Testability and Meaning”, Carnap was sent the typescript of Reichenbach’s Experience and Prediction for evaluation by the University of Chicago Press. In a long letter to Reichenbach he takes him to task for exaggerating the drawbacks of what Reichenbach chastises as the “disparity conception” of probability, whereby the “weight” (or “degree of confirmation” as Carnap also calls it) and probability (understood as relative frequency) are two separate (disparate) things. Reichenbach had gone so far in his submitted draft, apparently, as to claim that the disparity conception was not only the root of all philosophical error, but a form of metaphysics. Carnap says that he himself is not sure what side he is on regarding the disparity conception (and there is no reason to doubt this, in 1937, as far as we know), but he thinks both its acceptance and its rejection are perfectly compatible with empiricism, and advises Reichenbach to tone down his rhetoric. Though he was open-minded about the “disparity conception” during this period, it was only in the spring of 1941, according to Carnap’s autobiography, that he “began to reconsider the whole problem of probability” (1963a: 72). He re-read Keynes’s book more carefully, and found it very enlightening (ibid.). He began to develop a new conception of confirmation, influenced by both Waismann and Keynes: But I tried a new approach. I believed that the logical concept of probability should supply an exact quantitative explication of a concept which is basic in the methodology of empirical science, viz. the concept of the confirmation of a hypothesis. (1963a: 72) The starting point of Carnap’s new inductive logic was, first of all, precisely Reichenbach’s “disparity conception”—i.e., to distinguish very clearly between two different explicata of the ordinary-language word “probability”. One was relative frequency, which is an empirical matter, and was held up as the only acceptable interpretation of the Kolmogorov probability calculus by frequentists such as von Mises, Reichenbach, and (classically) Ronald Fisher. The other was epistemic probability, which Keynes and Harold Jeffreys held to be the only acceptable interpretation. Carnap called them “probability2” and “probability1” respectively, and set about clearing the ground for an explication of the latter, without casting any doubt on the legitimacy of “probability2” as an empirical tool. This distinction was the main focus of Carnap’s first article on inductive logic (Carnap 1945a). The conception he developed in his next article (Carnap 1945b) was indeed logical in the Wittgenstein-Waismann sense, in that the relation between observation sentences and hypothesis was purely logical and analytic. To achieve this, a relativized principle of indifference was needed; unlike that of Laplace or Keynes, Carnap’s was entirely language-relative (framework-relative); it was no longer a quasi-metaphysical assertion about the nature of distributions, let alone about the statistical nature of the world, but a matter of constitutive definition. As in any other area of knowledge, Carnap thought it essential to define the framework before making assertions, so that we are all on the same page. (This logical or “structural” conception of probability and the relativized principle of indifference are explained in concrete detail in the supplement  Inductive Logic.)  This means that the value of a confirmation measure as applied to a hypothesis and the evidence for or against it is an analytical consequence (in the chosen language framework) of the logical and inductive method given by the framework. In 1950, Carnap published what would be longest book of his career by far, the Logical Foundations of Probability, into which he worked these two papers (much expanded) and several others, and also went into great detail to bring a number of perspectives to bear on the clarification of the explicanda of “probability” and “confirmation” (both in the sense of probability1). He also goes into detail to discuss ways of arriving at axioms, and to motivate the choices he ends up with. In the course of these clarifications he addresses a number of philosophical issues surrounding induction, confirmation, and scientific inference. A simpler exposition than Carnap himself gave of his inductive logic project was given later by Kemeny (1963). See the supplement  Inductive Logic  for further details. Carnap’s inductive logic encountered a wide range of criticisms, e.g., that of Hilary Putnam, whose philosophical development had been strongly influenced by regular meetings with Carnap at Princeton in the 1950s. Putnam criticized the general idea of an algorithmic account of the inductive confirmation of scientific hypothesis by evidence (as exemplified by the special confirmation measure \(c^*\) that is described in the appendix of Carnap 1950b), while at the same time laying the foundations of what would become formal learning theory (see Putnam 1963 and the concluding section of the supplement  Inductive Logic).  But perhaps the biggest obstacle to a better and more widespread understanding of Carnap’s inductive logic was the memorable caricature of Carnap’s whole enterprise by Karl Popper in his attacks on Carnap during the 1950s and 1960s (e.g., Popper 1963). These were so convincing that the philosophical public retained only the caricature and hardly bothered to consult the original. In other words, the same pattern repeated itself that we have already seen with respect to the Quine-Carnap controversies of the 1950s and 60s  (section 7  above)—for a long time, the general philosophical public retained only one side of the debate, influenced mainly by Quine’s (and then Popper’s) superior rhetorical skills, as a result of which both Quine and Popper were much more widely read than Carnap (though Quine’s proximity to traditional American pragmatism surely also played a role). The difference between these cases is that Popper, unlike Quine, actually misrepresented Carnap’s position quite blatantly, as Carnap’s supporters (e.g., Bar-Hillel 1955, 1956; Kemeny 1955, 1963) were quick to point out. (Michalos 1971 gives a well-informed, brief, but balanced survey of the Popper-Carnap controversy.) Statisticians (and statistically literate philosophers) have been quicker to acknowledge not only the continuity between Carnap’s inductive logic and the present-day renaissance of Bayesian statistical inference, but Carnap’s role in bringing epistemic probability back from the dead and ensuring that it was taken seriously again (e.g., Leblanc 1962; Skyrms 1996; Zabell 2007, 2011). Many of the standard features of current Bayesianism were first formulated in Carnap’s Logical Foundations and in his subsequent work. Carnap went on working on inductive logic for another 20 years after Logical Foundations; his final statement (the “Basic System”), in which prior probabilities depended on geometrical “quality space” features of the given framework, appeared after his death in two long installments, edited by his friend and associate Richard Jeffrey (Carnap 1971a, 1980; for an extensive discussion of the “Basic System”, see Hilpinen 1973, Sznajder 2017). His later work appeared to move in a more “personalist” direction (though see Sznajder 2018), but Carnap continued to insist that the prior probability from which a statistical inference proceeds be motivated rationally (by considerations of symmetry) and not be merely subjective; here he stuck to his original idea of the relation between evidence and hypothesis being purely analytic and thus framework-relative. Though this distinguishes his standpoint from current subjective Bayesians, there are and have been many other kinds of Bayesians that are reasonably close to Carnap’s views, including “objective” Bayesians (e.g., Jaynes 1968, J. Williamson 2010). (For more on Carnap’s relation to current Bayesianism and various discussions of it today, see the supplement  Inductive Logic.)  As one prominent Bayesian pointed out in 1971, one can distinguish at least 46,656 possible varieties of Bayesians (Good 1971), and Zabell (a later prominent Bayesian) thinks Carnap would surely qualify for inclusion among these. Zabell also cites a characteristically conciliatory passage from Carnap’s posthumous “Basic System” that sums up Carnap’s appraisal of the situation: I think there need not be a controversy between the objectivist point of view and the subjectivist or personalist point of view. Both have a legitimate place in the context of our work, that is, the construction of a set of rules for determining probability values with respect to possible evidence. At each step in the construction, a choice is to be made; the choice is not completely free but is restricted by certain boundaries. Basically there is merely a difference in attitude or emphasis between the subjectivist tendency to emphasize the existing freedom of choice, and the objectivist tendency to stress the existence of limitations. (Carnap 1980: 119, quoted by Zabell 2007: 294) As we saw in  section 6.1,  by the late 1930s Carnap had returned to a consideration of theoretical languages whose primitive terms are not constructed bottom-up from observation sentences at all but entirely top-down, “floating in the air, so to speak” so that these basic theoretical terms can have “only an indirect interpretation, which is incomplete in a certain sense” (Carnap 1939: 65). In Carnap’s mind, the question of confirmation of theories and the question of the empirical content of theories were directly and inseparably connected, as they had been in “Testability and Meaning”. In this subsequent work on these two questions, however, they were pursued separately, and for all of Carnap’s efforts, the two strands could not be joined up. His inductive logic was never able to assign a degree of confirmation other than zero to unrestricted universally quantified theories, which was obviously a defect of the theory and was seized upon by Popper as discrediting the entire enterprise (e.g., Popper 1963). Carnap’s own way around the problem was to argue that scientists often regard the degree by which a piece of evidence E confirms a universal law hypothesis \(\forall x P(x)\) to be given by the degree to which E confirms an “arbitrary” instance of the law \(P(a)\), where a is an individual constant that does not occur in E: see Carnap (1945b: §14). Later authors tried to repair the defect in alternative ways, with varying degrees of success; see the supplement  Inductive Logic.  On the other hand, though Carnap’s work on the empirical content of sentences in a theoretical language often discusses the relations between observational language and theoretical language, he was never quite able to spell out a criterion for empirically meaningful sentences in the theoretical language that did not fall prey to fairly straightforward criticism (e.g., Kaplan 1975). The grand design of connecting up the projects of explicating confirmation and of reconstructing scientific theoretical language remained a distant goal. We have already surveyed the inductive-logic side in the previous  section 8.2.  On the theoretical-language side, Carnap’s first major paper was “The methodological character of theoretical concepts” (Carnap 1956a), followed by “Observation language and theoretical language” (Carnap 1958) and “Theoretical concepts in science” (1959a). Carnap also touches on theoretical languages in several parts of the Schilpp volume (1963). Philosophical Foundations of Physics (1966), finally, is a redaction by Martin Gardner of a class Carnap gave at UCLA in the late 1950s, presented as an introductory textbook in the philosophy of science. Among other things, it gives a lucid summary of Carnap’s mature views on the reconstruction of scientific theories. See the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Sections 3–5)  for details and criticism. One common misunderstanding of Carnap’s work on the theoretical language is an extension of the above-discussed misunderstandings of the Aufbau  (section 3  above). The Aufbau was traditionally perceived as an exercise in providing phenomenalist or empiricist foundations for scientific sentences. Therefore, it was assumed, the later work on both inductive logic and the theoretical language must be motivated by the aim of providing empiricist foundations for scientific sentences, to distinguish them from non-scientific, i.e., metaphysical sentences. This was certainly Popper’s view, for instance, and largely Quine’s, but they were not alone; it was widespread until the 1990s, when the new and more careful scholarship about logical empiricism began to take hold. It is true, of course, that in Carnap’s later work on scientific theories and theoretical languages, he distinguishes between a theoretical language and an observation language, and studied the relations between them. What is often overlooked, though, is that even in the Aufbau (and even in the earliest proto-Aufbau manuscripts) Carnap was very clear that what we are to take as “the given” is not inherently fixed or given by nature (as Aristotle would have put it), but something we have to decide on, something we have to specify provisionally in our chosen form of rational reconstruction. Later Carnap became even clearer that what we choose to regard as “observation sentences” is purpose-relative and can’t be decided once for all contexts, in the abstract. As early as “Testability and Meaning” (TM1: §16) Carnap was saying that “there can be several and even mutually exclusive bases” for confirmation by observation. And in later work on the theoretical language this pluralism is extended; in “The methodological character of theoretical concepts” he merely enumerates various possible requirements of different kinds and strengths that might be imposed on the observation language. In Carnap’s view, the choice of the theoretical language depends on the purpose. The boundary between “observational” and “theoretical” terms, likewise, is relative to the language chosen and not fixed by nature: no sharp boundary separates the O-terms from the T-terms. The choice of an exact dividing line is somewhat arbitrary. From a practical point of view, however, the distinction is usually evident. (Carnap 1966: 258) Observational terms are assumed to be fully interpreted; their specification comes with an explicit link to observation (precisely defined in some way), while theoretical terms are specified axiomatically and are, in the first instance, uninterpreted or only mathematically interpreted formulas. These formulas can then be endowed with physical (or chemical, or biological, or social) interpretations by means of correspondence rules, which logically relate observation terms and theoretical terms. Carnap’s views on the theoretical language during this period developed in response to critiques and commentaries from (as well as personal correspondence with) C.G. Hempel (1945, 1958, 1963). One response to these interactions was Carnap’s adoption of an idea first suggested by Frank Ramsey (1929) for the purpose of separating the theoretical from the empirical content of a theory; this idea first appeared in print in (the original German version of) Carnap’s paper “Observation language and theoretical language” (1958). (This procedure is explained in detail in the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Sections 4–6).)  The idea was that a theory could essentially be stated in such a way that all the theoretical terms in it are eliminated, i.e., it could be stated solely in terms of its “empirical residue”. But Carnap’s goal in adopting this method was not to suggest that the theoretical language was eliminable, that theoretical terms could or should be eliminated (as some versions of traditional empiricism might have liked). The point was rather to understand the empirical content of theoretical claims, and its logical function within theories. This leads to many complications, which are still very much under discussion (e.g., Demopoulos 2007, Friedman 2011, Schurz 2005). The Ramsey approach was adopted, following Carnap, by others, notably David Lewis (1970), who put it to a rather different, more metaphysical use that was later adopted by Frank Jackson and other advocates of the “Canberra Plan” of conceptual analysis. This was also Chalmers’s (2012) point of departure, in his more metaphysical adaptation of the Aufbau, mentioned above  (section 3).  See the supplement  The Reconstruction of Scientific Theories (Section 4).