 The Wittgensteinian program favored by the Vienna Circle  (section 2.4  above) had collapsed in 1930. But Carnap soon recovered, and during a sleepless night on 21 January 1931, conceived of an entirely new basis for the Vienna Circle’s characteristic doctrines (Awodey & Carus 2009). Instead of trying to fuse Hilbert and Wittgenstein, Carnap now dropped Wittgenstein altogether and pursued a Hilbertian approach. “Meaning” was no longer rooted in the correspondence between configurations of elementary facts and their linguistic representations. In fact, meaning was banished altogether, at least in our statements about the language of science (our metalinguistic “elucidations” such as those in the Tractatus itself or the Aufbau). The scientific language itself had empirical meaning, but how this was to be understood became a matter of dispute (the famous “protocol-sentence debate”) within the Vienna Circle (the sentences recording observations were called Protokollsätze by the Circle, which became “protocol sentences” in garbled English). This brought about a split in the Circle between a more realistic “right wing” (who adhered to something closer to Wittgenstein’s picture theory and held that once a state of affairs was “registered [konstatiert]” by an observer there could be no further doubt) and the “left wing” who followed Carnap in his new reference-avoiding syntax program (see Uebel 2007 on this debate). In any case our elucidations of the object language remain, in the new syntax framework, entirely within the linguistic realm; we are talking always and only about language. In logical syntax, we should be careful not to talk about “facts” or “things” but instead only about sentences or thing-names. We should restrict ourselves in principle to the “formal mode of speech” (sentences and names), employing the “material mode of speech” (facts and things) only for convenience, and when we are sure we can translate it into the formal mode. The (meta-)mathematical methods of Hilbert, Tarski, and Gödel were, in other words, to be extended to the whole of knowledge. Carnap’s immediate task was to create a canonical language for the formal mode of speech. Taking his cue from Hilbert’s metamathematics, he began by stripping this language down to bare bones, eliminating all problematic assumptions. It would consist simply of strings of dots on a page, and the basic laws of arithmetic would arise unambiguously in the metalanguage from the immediately evident patterns of dots (e.g., the commutative law from the perceptibly equivalent number of dots counted from the left and from the right). Carnap soon found he could not express certain essential concepts in this limited language, and turned instead to a more usual axiomatized arithmetic. This also had the advantage that, by using Gödel’s new trick of arithmetizing syntax, Carnap could now more easily express the syntax of the language (i.e., its logic) in the language itself. So the syntactic metalanguage collapses into the object language, and there is, as before, only a single language. The canonical language for the formal mode of speech seemed within his grasp. This idea also gave Carnap a new route to the elimination of metaphysics, superseding the Wittgensteinian strategy with its meaning criterion. The new criterion dispensed with meaning. It required that any statement either be at the object level (straightforwardly factual) or translatable into the formal mode of speech—i.e., into the canonical language or an equivalent. Carnap assumed that his canonical language, once fully worked out, could express the entire language of physics, as well as containing its own metalanguage. Since the Vienna Circle’s “unity of science” program held that all knowledge was expressible in the language of physics, Carnap proposed his canonical language as a universal language for all knowledge (Carnap 1932b). Another way of expressing the new criterion, then, was that any acceptable statement must be phrased in the language of physics. The new idea of January 1931 flowed into Carnap’s discussions with Neurath and others to produce the new doctrine of physicalism (Uebel 2007, 2018). But the demands on the “correct” language for the formal mode of speech were exorbitant. Carnap had originally wanted to keep it weak and uncontroversial, but it had to be capable of expressing all the mathematics needed for physics. On the other hand, its arithmetized syntax had to be capable of expressing the basic concept of “analytic truth”, or it would be impossible to determine when a formal-mode statement “holds”. Before 1930, it had been assumed that provability was the standard of mathematical truth, but now Gödel had shown that for each consistent and recursively axiomatized system that included enough arithmetic, some true sentences are not provable in the system. So a different criterion was needed, but one that would still—like provability—pick out the logically true sentences solely by means of the formation and transformation rules of the language. Carnap did attempt such a criterion for “analyticity” in the first draft of his syntax book (entitled Metalogic), written in late 1931 and the spring of 1932. He sent the typescript to Gödel, who pointed out that the new criterion was defective. In fact, he added, it is impossible to define analyticity or logical truth in any metalanguage that can be faithfully represented in the object language (e.g., by arithmetization); this is now familiar to us as Tarski’s theorem on the indefinability of truth. So Carnap’s single-language approach fails after all (Awodey & Carus 2007, 2009). And without the single canonical language containing its own metalanguage, there is no longer any reason to regard any particular metalanguage as more “suitable” or “natural” than any other. One option may turn out to be more useful than another for particular purposes, but this is no reason to privilege it as uniquely “correct” (or canonical). With Gödel’s assistance, Carnap developed a new definition of analyticity, but it hardly seemed to matter any more; the language relativity of any definition of truth or analyticity moved to the center of attention. The disputes about protocol sentences within the Vienna Circle merged in Carnap’s mind with the disputes among intuitionists, logicists, and formalists in the philosophy of mathematics. All these disputes, he realized in the autumn of 1932, concerned the question of how to set up a language, which has no right or wrong answers. One could only try out different ways, and see which ones worked better. This new attitude, which first appeared in Carnap’s reply to Neurath about protocol sentences (Carnap 1932b), received its definitive statement in the “principle of tolerance” quoted in 1c. above, enunciated in the Logical Syntax of Language (LSS: §17). In this principle, the voluntarist and utopian convictions of his youth, partially submerged during the Aufbau period, finally found adequate philosophical expression. He spent the remainder of his career absorbing the consequences of this breakthrough, and working on a vast number of language projects within the new freedom it afforded.