 “Is There an Absolute Good?” was apparently delivered on the 14th of March 1922 at special meeting of the Apostles (RoE: 122–124/Papers 9: 345–346). Russell opens up in the fine, flippant style that the Apostles tended to admire: When the generation to which I belong were young, Moore persuaded us all that there is an absolute good. Most of us drew the inference that we were absolutely good, but this is not an essential part of Moore's position, though it is one of its most attractive parts. But he soon gets down to philosophical business in what must be one of the pithiest meta-ethical papers on record (it is a mere 809 words long). Moore is right, he says, in thinking that “when we say a thing is good we do not merely mean that we have towards it a certain feeling, of liking or approval or what not.” Indeed “ethical judgments claim objectivity”; that is, they purport to tell it like it is.  However, this “claim [to] objectivity … makes them all false”. Since there is no property of goodness corresponding to the linguistic predicate “good”, nothing can ever possess it. Hence, any claim that friendship or anything else is good will be false, since there is no such thing as goodness for friendship or pleasure to be. The same goes for badness. Moreover, if there is no such thing as goodness or badness, there is no such thing as rightness either, since for an action to be genuinely right it must be such that it can reasonably be expected to produce more good and less bad than any alternative. But if there is no such thing as goodness to be produced, no action can be expected to produce more of it than any other. Of course, an action can still be relatively right: more likely to produce more of what somebody believes to be good and less of what somebody believes to be bad than any alternative. But no action can be genuinely right or genuinely obligatory, since there are no such properties as goodness or badness for conscientious agents to maximize or minimize. Thus far this is very like the error theory of J.L. Mackie (see Mackie 1946, 1977: ch. 1 and Joyce 2001). But there is a twist. For Mackie, as for Russell, “good” is a meaningful predicate even though there is no property corresponding to the word. But Mackie, unlike Russell, is unfazed by this fact. So far as Mackie is concerned, meaningful predicates that refer to non-existent properties pose no particular problems. But for Russell, we can only talk meaningfully about non-existent things if they are defined in terms of things with which we are acquainted. This is a consequence of his Fundamental Principle that every proposition that we can understand must be composed wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted (Mysticism and Logic: 209/Papers 6: 154) or, as he was later to put it, that sentences we can understand must be composed of words with whose meaning we are acquainted. (Schilpp (ed.) 1944: 692/Papers 11: 27) According to Russell, it seems natural to infer, as Moore did, that, since propositions in which the word “good” occurs have meaning, the word “good” [itself] has [a] meaning. This, however, is a “fallacy”. Even though “good” can appear in meaningful sentences it does not have a meaning of its own. This is very puzzling. What does Russell mean when he says that “good” has no meaning? And why is Moore's view dependent on the thesis that it does? Let us start with Moore. As stated above (§2.1), Moore's Open Question Argument goes like this: From (1) and (2) it follows that From (3) and (4) it follows that Premise (3) is crucial. Moore takes it for granted that the meaning of a predicate is the property for which it stands. Hence, if there were no property of goodness corresponding to the word “good”, “good” would be meaningless. Since “good” is quite obviously not meaningless, the corresponding property is guaranteed. Thus we move from an obvious semantic fact—that “good” is plainly meaningful—to a much more contentious metaphysical claim—that there is a corresponding property of goodness. What greases the wheels of this transition is the apparently innocuous assumption that if a word like “good” is to mean something, there must be some thing (or at least some property) that it means. If this doctrine were true, then the objections to objectivism discussed in the last section would fall to the ground. The very fact that we can talk meaningfully about goodness would show that there must indeed be such a property. It might be causally impotent and metaphysically queer, but the fact that we can discuss it would entail that we were stuck with it anyway. To the end of his days Russell believed that there are words which are only significant because there is something that they mean, and if there were not this something, they would be empty noises not words. (Russell 1959: 177) But when he was young he thought that most words were like this, which explains the swollen ontology of The Principles of Mathematics: Homeric gods, relations, chimeras and four-dimensional spaces all have being, for if they were not entities of a kind, we could make no propositions about them. (Russell, The Principles of Mathematics: 449) The breakthrough came with his Theory of Definite Descriptions (1905). Phrases such as “the present King of France” are incomplete symbols, which can function meaningfully in the context of a sentence even though there may be nothing that they mean.  They are incomplete because they have no meaning when taken in isolation and in the context of a sentence can be analyzed away. When “the King of France is bald” is analyzed in accordance with Russell's formula—“There is something which is King of France such that if anything is King of France, it is identical with that thing, and that thing is bald”—the phrase “the King of France” simply disappears, though we are left with the predicate “is King of France”. “The King of France is bald”, is false because there is no King of France—nothing which satisfies the propositional function being king of France—and there is no need to suppose that the King of France must have some kind of being in order for this proposition to make sense. This brings us back to the Open Question Argument. So far as I can see, Russell continued to accept premises (1) and (2) and thus—with reservations—sub-conclusion (4). “Good” does not mean that same as any naturalistic predicate X—at least, it does not mean the same as any of the naturalistic predicates that have been suggested so far. But he also accepts something like premise (3), that the meaning of a predicate is the property for which it stands. It was because he believed that some predicates were among the words “which are only significant because there is something that they mean”, and which would be “empty noises not words” in the absence of this something, that he continued to believe in properties, right up until 1959. How then can Russell fend off Moore's conclusion (5) that there is a property of goodness that is not identical to any naturalistic property of X-ness? By modifying premise (3): Some predicates are not complete symbols, and these can function meaningfully in the absence of the properties that they might denote. One of these predicates is the word “good”. Without the theory of incomplete symbols, it seemed natural to infer, as Moore did, that, since propositions in which the word “good” occurs have meaning, therefore the word “good” has meaning [or as we might now say, a referent]; but this was a fallacy. My point is that the word “good” does not stand for a predicate [by which Russell means a property] at all, but has a meaning only in the sense in which descriptive phrases have meaning, i.e., in use, not in isolation. Thus “good” can be meaningful in the absence of a property of goodness and the error theory is safe from semantic refutation. But Russell is not quite out of the woods. He continued to believe in his Fundamental Principle that to understand a proposition we must be acquainted with the referents of the words that remain once the proposition has been boiled down to its ultimate constituents. This means, in effect, that things which don't exist have to be defined in terms of things which do, indeed, that things which don't exist have to be defined terms of things (including universals) with which we are acquainted. How then is “good” to be defined? More pedantically, how are sentences involving “good” to be analyzed so that the word “good” can be eliminated? According to Russell, when we judge “M is good”, we mean: “M has that predicate [property] which is common to A, B, C, …[the things we approve of] but is absent in X, Y, Z, …[the things we disapprove of].” The emotions of approval and disapproval, Russell notes, do not enter into the meaning of the proposition “M is good”, but only into its genesis. That is, “good” is defined in terms of the things that we approve (and disapprove) of, even though the fact that we approve (or disapprove) of them is not incorporated into the analysis. Now, in Russell's opinion, the proposition M has that property which is common to A, B, C, … [the things we approve of] but is absent in X, Y, Z, … [the things we disapprove of], will be always be false since the things we approve of have nothing in common apart from the fact that we approve of them. That is why “all propositions in which the word “good” has a primary occurrence are false.” But will such propositions in fact be false? Surely X, Y, Z etc do have a property in common, namely the property of being X or Y or Z or …! Perhaps Russell would reply that disjunctive properties are not real properties. He took a dim view of disjunctive facts in The Philosophy of Logical Atomism, and if disjunctive facts should be rejected, then disjunctive properties would appear to be equally suspect (Papers 8: 185–6/The Philosophy of Logical Atomism: 71–72). Even so, we cannot be sure that in every case the things that we approve of don't have something in common other than a) the fact that we approve of them and b) that they satisfy a disjunctive predicate. Nor is this the only problem. Though Russell defines “good” in terms of the things that “we” approve (and disapprove) of, what he seems to mean is that each person defines “good” in terms of the things that he or she approves (or disapproves) of. Thus if you and I approve of different things, when I say “M is good” and you say “M is not good” what I mean is that M has the property shared by X, Y, Z … [the things that I approve of] whereas what you mean is that is that it does not have the property shared by A, B, C … [the things that you approve of]. But in that case the Problem of the Disappearing Dispute rears its ugly head. On Russell's theory my “M is good” and your “M is not good” may be quite consistent. But since they are obviously not consistent, there must be something wrong with Russell's theory. We can put the point by paraphrasing Russell's own criticisms of simple subjectivism: If in asserting that A is good, [a person] X meant merely to assert that A had a certain relation to himself such as pleasing his taste in some way [or that A had a characteristic shared by the things of which he approved] and Y, in saying that A is not good, meant merely to deny that A had a like relation to himself [or to deny that A had the characteristic shared by the things of which he, Y, approved]; then there would be no subject of debate between them. (Philosophical Essays: 20–21/Papers 6: 222) Nor is this all. As we saw in §8.1, our moral sentiments are partly constituted by our moral beliefs. What distinguishes approval from a warm feeling of liking is not some difference in phenomenological flavor but the thought that the thing we approve of is good or right. Our moral sentiments are feelings that, where what follows the “that” is a moral judgment. But if we can't have feelings of approval or disapproval without the corresponding moral beliefs, we can't explain the intellectual origins of the common conceptions of goodness and badness in terms of pre-existing sentiments of approval or disapproval. For prior to these conceptions there were no such sentiments. This is not the criticism that sank the emotivist theories of Ayer and Stevenson. The problem is not that Russell's analysis of “good” is viciously circular because it presupposes the very concept that it purports to explicate. The problem is that his genealogy of “good” is viciously circular (and therefore false) since it presupposes the concept it purports to explain. For in his capacity as an error-theorist Russell does not define “good” and “bad” in terms of approval and disapproval. Rather he gives a genealogy of these notions in which the feelings of approval and disapproval play a crucial part. As he himself puts it: “the emotions of approval and disapproval do not enter into the meaning of the proposition ‘M is good’, but only into its genesis”. But our concepts of “good” and “bad” cannot be caused by prior feelings of approval and disapproval if those feelings are partly constituted by the very beliefs they are supposed to cause. My belief that M is good cannot be caused by tendency to approve of M, if I cannot approve of M without believing that M is good. However, the real difficulty with Russell's error theory and the one which probably weighed with Russell himself, seems to be this. Given Russell's theory of meaning, he can make sense of non-existent properties but not non-natural predicates. At least, he cannot make sense of predicates that are not definable in terms of things with which we are acquainted. Thus on the assumption that we are not acquainted with goodness (which we obviously cannot be if there is really no such thing), and on the assumption that “good” cannot defined in terms of the things with which we are acquainted (which seems pretty plausible if is not equivalent to any naturalistic predicate) then we cannot even understand the predicate “good”. At least, we cannot understand it, if it is construed as a descriptive predicate whose function it is to denote a property (whether real or non-existent). After 1922, Russell abandoned the error theory and reverted to the emotivism that he had been flirting with since 1913. His reasons remain obscure. But perhaps it had something to do with the fact that his Fundamental Principle, when combined with the OQA, made it difficult, if not impossible, to make sense of “good” as standing for a property that is both non-existent and non-natural.  Since he retained his faith in the Fundamental Principle he had to give up the error theory. And since he had already rejected the objectivity of ethics—what we would nowadays describe as moral realism—this left him no alternative but some form of non-cognitivsm.  In my opinion this was the wrong choice. He would have done better to give up the Fundamental Principle and stick with the error theory. But perhaps the thesis that moral judgments are mostly false was a bit too much for a dedicated moralist such as he. As he wrote to his brother, he would rather “be mad with truth than sane with lies” and the idea that morality was largely composed of lies—or a best useful fictions—would have been too much to bear (see Pigden (ed.) 1999: 20, 121–122, & 189–193).