 “When I was young,” writes Russell, I agreed with G.E. Moore in believing in the objectivity of good and evil. Santayana's criticism in a book called Winds of Doctrine, [which Russell read in 1913] caused me to abandon this view, though I have never been able to be as bland and comfortable about it as he was. (Portraits from Memory: 91) As a piece of intellectual autobiography this is not very illuminating. Santayana's book abounds in mellifluous sneers, but arguments are conspicuous by their absence. Russell's reasons for rejecting a non-natural property of goodness have to be reconstructed from literary asides, delivered in passing in the course of his anti-War polemics. However, Santayana does give one reason, not for doubting the existence of the Moorean Good, but for wishing that nobody believed in it. The idea that there are objective moral facts breeds intolerance and fanaticism.  Accordingly, the rejection of this idea “would tend to render people more truly social”, specifically, more tolerant.  “Moral warfare would continue”, he writes, “but not with poisoned arrows.” Russell came to agree, especially after the outbreak of World War I. My H[erbert] S[pencer] lecture was partly inspired by disgust at the universal outburst of righteousness in all nations since the war began. It seems the essence of virtue is persecution, and it has given me a disgust of all ethical notions, which evidently are chiefly useful as an excuse for murder. (Letter to Samuel Alexander, 5/2/1915, RoE: 107/Papers 8: 56) There is something rather paradoxical about this, since Russell was firmly convinced of the rightness of his own anti-War activities: “When the War came, I felt as if I heard the voice of God. I knew it was my business to protest, however futile protest might be” (Autobiography II: 18). If there are no objective moral properties, there is no such thing as moral knowledge, which means that Russell cannot have literally known that he ought to protest. At best he could have known that he ought to protest given his values. But though he sometimes seems to talk as if it is objectively wrong to believe in objective values, Russell's position is (or can be made to be) coherent. It might just be a fact that moral realists tend to be more intolerant and cruel than moral relativists and anti-realists. Hence those who dislike intolerance and cruelty have a reason for running down objectivity. As Russell himself put it, for my part, I should wish to see in the world less cruelty, persecution, punishment, and moral reprobation than exists at present; to this end, I believe that a recognition of the subjectivity of ethics might conduce. (RoE: 117/Papers 13: 326) The word “recognition” suggests that the “subjectivity of ethics” is true, and thus that there is no such thing as a non-natural property of goodness. But setting the success-word to one side, it might be the case that we would be better off believing in the subjectivity of ethics since believing in objective values leads to persecution, punishment, cruelty and moral reprobation.  It might pay in terms of peace, love and understanding if people came to believe Russell's brand of emotivism. But the fact that a belief pays, in some sense, does not make it true, as Russell himself was at pains to point out (see Philosophical Essays, chs. iv & v). So even if we would be better off believing that there were no objective values (a thesis Russell later came to doubt), this does not prove that there are no such things. So what were Russell's reasons for rejecting a non-natural property of goodness? One argument, subsequently popularized by J.L. Mackie (1977) as “the Argument from Relativity”, starts with the diversity of moral opinion and the supposed impossibility of proof when it comes to ultimate values. If our views as to what ought to be done were to be truly rational, we ought to have a rational way of ascertaining what things are such as ought to exist on their own account [that is, what things are good] …. On [this] point, no argument is possible. There can be nothing beyond an appeal to individual tastes. If, for example, one man thinks vindictive punishment desirable in itself, apart from any reformatory or deterrent effects, while another man thinks it undesirable in itself, it is impossible to bring any arguments in support of either side. (RoE: 112/Papers 13: 186) Now it is, of course, a consequence of Russell's later view both a) that it is impossible to have a rational argument about “what things are such as ought to exist on their own account” and b) that in such disputes there can be nothing beyond “an appeal to individual tastes”. But though you can argue from emotivism and the non-existence of objective goodness to the truth of a) and b), can you argue from a) and b) to the non-existence of objective goodness? The argument, I suggest, is best construed as an inference to the best explanation. The best explanation of a) that it is impossible to have a rational argument about what is good or bad in itself and b) that in such disputes there can be nothing beyond “an appeal to individual tastes” is the hypothesis c) that there is nothing objective to disagree about since there is no such thing as goodness—rather our opinions on these topics are somehow dependent on, or expressive of, our disparate desires and perhaps our diverse upbringings. Is this a good argument? Not by itself, no. For it is not clear that theses a) and b) represent genuine facts. And even if a) and b) are true and do represent genuine facts, is c) the best explanation? Perhaps there is a property of goodness but it happens to be a property that it is difficult to discern. Some people are just better at seeing what is good or bad than others. As Russell himself put it in 1909 “the difficulty of discovering the truth does not prove that there is no truth to be discovered” (Philosophical Essays: 20/Papers 6: 222). However, the Argument From Relativity looks a little better if we follow Russell's hints and combine it with the Argument from Explanatory Impotence. In his polemical article “North Staffs' Praise of War” (1916) Russell suggests an argument which prefigures a famous argument of Gilbert Harman's 1977. (It is typical of Russell, incidentally, that he develops his meta-ethical position in the course of a newspaper controversy about the rights and wrongs of World War I rather than in an article in an academic journal.) I have been led to [the view that all ethics is subjective] by a number of reasons, some logical, some derived from observation. Occam's Razor … leads me to discard the notion of absolute good if ethics can be accounted for without it. Observation of ethical valuations leads me to think that all ethical valuations can be so accounted for, and that the claim of universality which men associate with their ethical judgments embodies merely the impulse to persecution or tyranny. (RoE: 117/Papers 13: 325–6) The idea seems to be that our moral evaluations—our beliefs about what is good or bad, wrong or right—can be explained without supposing that they correspond to facts involving Moorean properties of “absolute” goodness or badness.  And since our evaluations can be accounted for without supposing that there are any such properties, and since the only reason for we believing in them is the evidence of our evaluations, we have no reason to suppose that such properties exist, and some reasons (of an Occamist sort) for supposing that they do not. As it stands, this argument is inconclusive. For a Moorean might simply hang tough, insisting that his own views about goodness are best explained by close encounters of the Platonic kind, involving an intimate acquaintance with both goodness itself and the properties on which it supervenes. Of course, it is difficult to make naturalistic sense of such cognitions, but it is difficult to make naturalistic sense of our knowledge of logic, mathematics and modality. This is the “companions in guilt” strategy that is often deployed in arguing for moral objectivity (for more on which, see Lillehammer 2007). However the Argument from Explanatory Impotence gets a little stronger if we combine it with the Argument from Relativity. For the fact is that people often disagree about what is intrinsically good or bad, about how good or bad the good things and the bad things really are, and about the relations between goodness and badness and what we ought to do. We have already seen that Russell disagreed with Moore about whether we ought to do that action that will actually bring about the best consequences or the action that it is reasonable to believe will bring about the best consequences, which means that they had different intuitions about the relations between goodness and obligation. Moore disagreed with Sidgwick about whether anything besides pleasure is good as an end: This proposition that “pleasure alone is good as an end,” the fundamental proposition of Ethical Hedonism [is] in Professor Sidgwick's language, … an object of intuition. I shall try to shew you why my intuition denies it, just as his intuition affirms it. It may always be true notwithstanding; neither intuition can prove whether it is true or not; I am bound to be satisfied, if I can “present considerations capable of determining the intellect” to reject it. (PE: §45) More comically, the Cambridge Apostles seem to have had a serious disagreement in 1899 about whether “self-abuse” was bad in itself, Moore intuiting that it was and his opponents arguing that it was not (Levy 1981: 207–8). Now, how could Moore explain the intuitions of his opponents? Not by an encounter with badness, since anybody fully acquainted with badness and its relata would have been forced to admit that self-abuse was bad. The non-natural facts being impotent in this particular, he would have been driven back on natural causes (such as a taste for self-abuse) to explain the misperceptions of his degenerate opponents. Thus he would have been forced to admit that some moral evaluations could be explained without the aid of non-natural properties.  But once this is admitted, a “Why stop there?” problem opens up. For after all, it would have been child's play for his opponents to return the compliment, Moore's self-denying intuitions being the obvious products of a Puritanical upbringing.  Once we admit that some moral intuitions can be explained by natural, as opposed to non-natural, causes—which seems pretty obvious given the prevalence of moral “error”—it is hard to hold the line and insist that there are any of them that cannot be accounted for by temperament, upbringing, desire and taste. It is possible, of course, that some moral evaluations are due to natural, and some to non-natural, causes, but given that everybody admits that many of our intuitions can be given a naturalistic explanation (namely, the mistaken ones), Occam's razor suggests that there is no need for the non-natural to explain those moral intuitions that we regard as correct. When supplemented by Relativity (which is what Russell seems to be hinting at) Explanatory Impotence provides a powerful argument against non-natural properties. Thus Russell's explicit arguments for the “subjectivity of value” are objections to objectivism rather than arguments for a rival hypothesis. Moore's theory is wrong since it presupposes non-existent non-natural properties of goodness and badness. But if naturalism is not an option, that still leaves two alternatives—some kind of non-cognitivism or an error-theory (see §1).  Russell's dominant view was to be a form of emotivism, and hence of non-cognitivism. But although emotivism was Russell's dominant view from 1913 onwards, there were two significant wobbles. In 1922 he proposed a version of the error theory, anticipating J. L. Mackie by over twenty years. And in 1954 in Human Society in Ethics and Politics, he endeavored to inject a little objectivity into ethics by developing a form of naturalism. The first wobble is more interesting than the second, but neither should be neglected in an account of Russell's ethics, even though Russell abandoned the theory of HSEP within weeks of publication, reverting to the emotivism of 1935.