 We turn now to Pyrrhonian  Skepticism.[17]  We remind the reader that our main interest here is not historical (for which see the entry on  ancient skepticism),  but rather systematic: we want to canvass the legacy of Pyrrhonian Skepticism for contemporary epistemology, and in so doing we set aside even the most cursory exegetical interest. Recall that, according to Pyrrhonian Skepticism, suspension of judgment is the only justified attitude with respect to any proposition (yes, including the proposition that suspension of judgment is the only justified attitude with respect to any proposition). We are interested here in whether there are good arguments for such a view. We begin by recalling the tri-partite distinction between belief, disbelief and suspension of judgment. If we identify disbelief in a proposition with belief in its negation, then we are left with two attitudes within the realm of coarse-grained epistemology: belief and suspension of judgment. We assume also that the arguments to follow are addressed to someone who has an interest in, and has considered, the propositions in question. Otherwise, there is always the possibility of not taking any attitude whatsoever towards a proposition. Such lack of an attitude cannot itself be (epistemically) justified or not. But if the subject is to take an attitude, then the argument for Pyrrhonian Skepticism has it that suspension of judgment is the only justified one. The Pyrrhonian skeptics sought suspension of judgment as a way of achieving calm (ataraxia) in the face of seemingly intractable disagreement. The Pyrrhonians had a number of ways, or “modes”, to induce suspension of judgment. The importance of Pyrrhonian Skepticism to contemporary epistemology derives primarily from these modes, and in particular from a subset of them referred to collectively as “the modes of Agrippa”. There are five modes associated with Agrippa, but three of them are the most important: the mode of hypothesis (or unsupported assertion), the mode of circularity (“reciprocal”), and the mode of regression to infinity. The three modes of Agrippa function together in the following way. Whenever the dogmatist (Sextus refers to those who are not skeptics as “dogmatists”, and we will follow him in this) asserts his belief in a proposition \(p_1\), the Pyrrhonian will challenge that assertion, asking the dogmatist to justify \(p_1\), to give reasons for thinking that it is true. The dogmatist will then either decline to answer the challenge or adduce another proposition \(p_2\) in support of \(p_1\). If the dogmatist refuses to answer the challenge, the Pyrrhonian will be satisfied that the only justified attitude to take with respect to \(p_1\) is to suspend judgment, because no reason for it has been given (thus appealing to the mode of hypothesis). If the dogmatist adduces another proposition \(p_2\) in support of \(p_1\), then either \(p_2\) will be identical to \(p_1\) or it will be a different proposition. If \(p_2\) is the same proposition as \(p_1\), then the Pyrrhonian will also suspend judgment with respect to \(p_1\), because no proposition can support itself (thus appealing to the mode of circularity). If, on the other hand, \(p_2\) is different from \(p_1\), then the Pyrrhonian will ask the dogmatist to justify his assertion of \(p_2\). And now either the dogmatist offers no reason in support of \(p_2\), or offers \(p_2\) itself or \(p_1\) as a reason, or adduces yet another proposition \(p_3\), different from both \(p_1\) and \(p_2\). If the dogmatist offers no reason for \(p_2\), then the Pyrrhonian will invoke the mode of hypothesis again and suspend judgment in accordance with it; if either \(p_2\) itself or \(p_1\) are offered as reasons to believe in \(p_1\), then the Pyrrhonian will invoke the mode of circularity and suspend judgment in accordance with it (because not only can no proposition be a reason for believing in itself, but also no genuine chain of reasons can loop); and, finally, if the dogmatist offers yet another proposition \(p_3\), different from both \(p_1\) and \(p_2\), as a reason to believe \(p_2\), then the same three possibilities that arose with respect to \(p_2\) will arise with respect to \(p_3\). The dogmatist will not be able to continue offering different propositions in response to the Pyrrhonian challenge forever—eventually, either no reason will be offered, or a proposition that has already made an appearance will be mentioned again. The Pyrrhonian refers to this impossibility of actually offering a different proposition each time a reason is needed as “the mode of infinite regression”. The three Pyrrhonian modes, then, work in tandem in order to induce suspension of judgment with respect to any proposition whatsoever. The Pyrrhonian use of the three modes of Agrippa in order to induce suspension of judgment can be presented in the form of an argument, which has been called “Agrippa’s trilemma”. It is at least somewhat misleading to present the Pyrrhonian position in terms of an argument, because when someone presents an argument they are usually committed to the truth of its premises and its conclusion, whereas Pyrrhonian skeptics would suspend judgment with respect to them. Nevertheless, presenting an argument for Pyrrhonian Skepticism doesn’t do much violence to this skeptical position, because what is important is not whether the Pyrrhonians themselves accept the premises or the validity of the argument, but rather whether we do. If we do, then it seems that we ourselves should be Pyrrhonian skeptics (and if we do become Pyrrhonian skeptics as a result of this argument, we can then start worrying about what to do with respect to the fact that an argument whose premises we believed—and perhaps still believe—to be true convinced us that we are not justified in believing anything). If we do not think that the argument is sound, then we stand to learn something interesting about the structure of an epistemological theory—because each of the premises of the apparently valid argument looks plausible at first sight. Before presenting a reconstruction of Agrippa’s trilemma we need to introduce some definitions. Let’s say that a belief is inferentially justified if and only if it is justified (at least in part) in virtue of its relations to other beliefs. A justified basic belief, by contrast, is a belief that is justified but not in virtue of its relations to other beliefs. An inferential chain is a set of beliefs such that every member of the set is allegedly related to at least one other member by the relation “is justified by”. Agrippa’s trilemma, then, can be presented thus: Therefore, Therefore, Premise 1 is beyond reproach, given our previous definitions. Premise 2 is justified by the mode of hypothesis. Step 3 of the argument follows from premises 1 and 2. Premise 4 is also beyond reproach—the only remaining possible structure for an inferential chain to have is to contain basic justified beliefs, but there are none of those according to premise 2. Premise 5 is justified by appeal to the mode of infinite regression, and premise 6 is justified by appeal to the mode of circularity. Premise 7 might seem to be a truism, but we will have to take a closer look at it. It is interesting to note that Agrippa’s trilemma is perfectly general; in particular, it applies to philosophical positions as well as to ordinary propositions. In fact, when Agrippa’s trilemma is applied to epistemological theories themselves, the result is what has been called “the problem of the criterion” (see Chisholm 1973). Many contemporary epistemological positions can be stated as a reaction to Agrippa’s trilemma. In fact, all of premises 2, 5, 6 and 7 have been rejected by different philosophers at one time or another. We examine those responses in what follows. Foundationalists claim that there are basic justified beliefs—beliefs that are justified but not in virtue of their relations to other beliefs. In fact, according to foundationalism, all justified beliefs are either basic beliefs or are justified (at least in part) in virtue of being inferentially related to a justified belief (or to some justified beliefs). This is where foundationalism gets its name: the edifice of justified beliefs has its foundation in basic beliefs. But how do foundationalists respond to the mode of hypothesis? If a belief is not justified by another belief, then isn’t it just a blind assertion? If basic beliefs are justified but not by other beliefs, then how are they justified? What else besides beliefs is there that can justify beliefs? To this last question, many foundationalists reply: experience (we are talking here about empirical knowledge; a priori knowledge raises interesting problems of its own, and it is of course also subject to Agrippa’s trilemma). To a rough first approximation that glosses over many important philosophical issues, experiences are mental states that, like beliefs, aim to represent the world as it is, and, like beliefs too, can fail in achieving that aim—that is, experiences can misrepresent. Nevertheless, experiences are not to be identified with beliefs, for it is possible to have an experience as of, e.g., facing two lines that differ in length without having the belief that one is facing two lines that differ in length—a combination of mental states that anyone familiar with the Müller-Lyer illusion will recognize. There are three important questions that any foundationalist has to answer. First, what kinds of beliefs do experiences justify? Second, how must inferentially acquired beliefs be related to basic beliefs in order for them to be justified? Third, in virtue of what do experiences justify beliefs? With respect to the first question, we can distinguish between traditional foundationalism and moderate foundationalism. Traditional foundationalists think that basic beliefs are beliefs about experiences, whereas moderate foundationalists think that experience can justify beliefs about the external world. Take, for example, the experience that you typically have when looking at a tomato under good perceptual conditions—an experience that, remember, can be had even if no tomato is actually  there.[18]  A moderate foundationalist would say that that experience justifies you in believing that there is a tomato in front of you. The traditional foundationalist, on the other hand, would say that the experience justifies you only in believing that you have an experience as of a tomato in front of you. You may well be justified in believing that there is a tomato in front of you, but only inferentially. A traditional argument in favor of traditional foundationalism relies on the fact that whereas you can be mistaken regarding whether there is a tomato in front of you when you have an experience as of facing a tomato, you cannot, in the same situation, be mistaken regarding whether you are undergoing such an experience. From the point of view of traditional foundationalism, this fact indicates that the moderate foundationalist is taking an unnecessary epistemic risk—the risk of having a foundation composed of false beliefs. The moderate foundationalist can reply that the traditional foundationalist must undertake a similar risk. For, while it is true that if one is undergoing a certain experience then one cannot be mistaken in thinking that one is undergoing that experience, one can still be mistaken about one’s experiences—for instance, perhaps one can believe that one is in pain even if the experience that one is undergoing is actually one of feeling acutely uncomfortable. And if it were just as difficult to distinguish between the true and the false in the realm of beliefs about our own experiences as it is in the realm of beliefs about the external world, then we could be wrong about which of our own beliefs are basically justified and which are not. If this kind of meta-fallibilism is accepted, then why not accept the further kind according to which basic justified beliefs can be false? Of course, the resolution of this dispute depends on whether, as the moderate believes, we can be mistaken about our own experiences. What about our second question: how must basic beliefs be related to inferentially justified beliefs? Here too there are two different kinds of foundationalism: deductivism and non-deductivism. According to the deductivist, the only way in which a (possibly one-membered) set of basic justified beliefs can justify another belief is by logically entailing that other belief. In other words, there has to be a valid argument at least some of whose premises are basic justified  beliefs[19]  and whose conclusion is the inferentially justified belief in question. Given that the argument is valid, the truth of the premises guarantees the truth of the conclusion—it is impossible for all the premises to be true while the conclusion is false. Non-deductivism allows relations other than logical entailment as possible justificatory relations. For instance, many foundationalists will claim that good inductive inferences from basic justified beliefs provide their conclusions with justification—even though inductive arguments are not valid, that is, even though it is possible for all the premises of a good inductive argument to be true while its conclusion is false. Although these are independent distinctions, traditional foundationalists tend to be deductivists, whereas moderate foundationalists tend to be non-deductivists. Notice that for a traditional, deductivist foundationalist, there cannot be false justified beliefs. Many contemporary epistemologists would shy away from this strong form of infallibilism, and take that consequence to be an argument against the conjunction of traditional foundationalism and deductivism. The question that is most interesting from the point of view of Pyrrhonian Skepticism is our third one: what is it about the relation between an experience and a belief that, according to the foundationalist, allows the former to justify the latter? (Analogous questions apply to non-foundationalist positions too, and the discussion to follow is not restricted to the specific case of foundationalism.) There are three different proposals about how to answer this question that are the most prominent. Let’s call the principles that assert that a subject is justified in having a certain belief given that she is undergoing a certain experience, “epistemic principles”. Our third question can then be stated as follows: what makes epistemic principles true? The first proposal, which we shall call “primitivism”, claims that the question cannot have an intelligible answer. There is no more basic fact in virtue of which epistemic principles obtain. They describe bedrock facts, not to be explained in terms of anything else, but are instead to be used to explain other facts. Epistemological theorizing, according to the primitivist, ends with the discovery of the correct epistemic principles (for views along these lines, see Chisholm 1966 [and also the second and third editions: 1977, 1989] and Feldman & Conee 1985). The other two positions are non-primitivist. Internalist non-primitivism holds that epistemic principles are true in virtue of facts about ourselves—for instance, one prominent internalist view is that which epistemic principles are true for a given subject is determined by which epistemic principles that subject would accept under deep reflection (see Foley  1993).[20] Externalist non-primitivism holds that epistemic principles are true in virtue of facts that are not about ourselves—for instance, one prominent externalist view is that certain experiences provide justification for certain beliefs because the obtaining of those experiences is reliably connected to the truth of those beliefs (that is, it couldn’t easily happen that those experiences obtain without those beliefs being true; see Goldman 1979). Both externalists and internalists think that primitivists are overlooking real facts, whereas primitivists think that there are fewer things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in non-primitivist philosophy. Within the non-primitivist camp, externalists think that internalists have too subjective a conception of epistemology—to some extent, thinking it so, or being disposed to think it so under conditions of deep reflection, makes it so for the internalist. Internalists, for their part, are likely to think that externalists are no longer engaged in the same project that both skeptics and internalist epistemologists are engaged in, the project of determining “from the inside” whether one’s beliefs are justified or amount to knowledge, because the obtaining of a relation between a belief of his and the external world is something that the subject is in no position to ascertain “from the inside”. Infinitism, the claim that infinite evidential chains can provide justification to their members, is the answer to Agrippa’s trilemma that has received the least attention in the literature. This is due, at least in part, to the fact that infinitism has to deal with what might seem like formidable obstacles. For instance, it seems that no one actually has an infinite number of beliefs. To this objection, the infinitist is likely to reply that actually occurring beliefs are not needed, only implicit beliefs that are available to the subject in order to continue constructing his inferential chain if called upon to do so (by others or by himself). The plausibility of this reply depends on whether good sense can be made of the notion of implicit belief and the notion of an implicit belief’s being available for a subject. A second apparently formidable problem for infinitism has to do with the fact that the mere appeal to a new belief, regardless of its epistemic status, cannot provide justification to the belief we started out with. In other words, infinitism seems to run afoul of the following principle: Principle of inferential justification: If S is justified in believing p on the basis of S’s belief that q, then S is justified in believing q. The infinitist might reply that he does not run afoul of that principle, because the beliefs adduced in support of the initial beliefs are themselves justified by beliefs further down the chain. But what goes for the initial set of beliefs goes, it seems, for longer chains. If the appeal to a single unjustified belief cannot do any justificatory work of its own, why would appealing to a large number of unjustified beliefs do any better? Even leaving that problem aside, the infinitist, like the coherentist, maintains that justification can arise merely in virtue of relations among beliefs. Infinitists will then have to respond to many of the same objections that are leveled against coherentism—in particular, they would have to respond to the isolation objection mentioned in the next section. (See Aikin 2011 and Klein 1999, 2007 for defenses of infinitism; and see Turri & Klein 2014; Aikin & Peijnenburg 2014; and Peijnenburg & Wenmackers 2014 for collections of essays which defend or criticize various forms of infinitism.) Coherentists reject two related features of the picture of evidential reasons that underlies Agrippa’s trilemma. The first feature is the idea that justification is an asymmetrical relation: if a belief \(p_1\) justifies a different belief \(p_2\), then \(p_2\) does not justify \(p_1\). The second feature is the idea that the unit of justification is the individual belief. Putting these two rejections together, the coherentist believes that justification is a symmetrical and holistic matter. It is not individual beliefs that are justified in the primary sense of the word, but only complete systems of beliefs—individual beliefs are justified, when they are, in virtue of belonging to a justified system of beliefs. The central coherentist notion of justification is best taken to be a comparative one: a system of beliefs B1 is better justified than a system of beliefs B2 if and only if B1 has a greater degree of internal coherence than B2. One crucial question that coherentists have to answer, of course, is what it takes for one system of beliefs to have a greater degree of coherence than another. Many coherentists have thought that explanatory relations will be crucial in elucidating the notion of coherence: the more explanatorily integrated a system is, the more coherence it displays (see Quine & Ullian 1970 [1978] and BonJour 1978). The main objection that coherentists have to answer has been called “the isolation objection”. The objection centers on the fact that, according to the coherentist, the justification of a system of beliefs is entirely a matter of relations among the beliefs constituting the system. But this runs against the strong intuition that experience has a very important role to play in the justification of beliefs. To illustrate the problem, suppose that you and I both have a highly coherent set of beliefs—your system, it is safe to assume, contains the belief that you are reading, whereas mine doesn’t, and it contains instead the belief that I am swimming (because, let us suppose, I am swimming right now). Suppose now that we switch systems of beliefs—somehow, you come to have my set of beliefs and I come to have yours. Given that coherence is entirely a matter of relations among beliefs, your system will be as coherent in my mind as it was in yours, and vice-versa. And yet, our beliefs are now completely unjustified—there you are, reading, believing that you are swimming, and here I am, swimming, believing that I am reading. In other words, certain transformations that preserve coherence in a system of beliefs do not seem to preserve justification. In reply, coherentists have argued that it is possible to give experience a role without sacrificing the idea that coherence is entirely a matter of relations among beliefs—one idea is to require that any minimally acceptable system of beliefs contain beliefs about the experiences that the subject is undergoing (see BonJour 1985 and Lehrer 1990). It is fair to say that there is no agreement regarding whether this move can solve the problem. One position that can be traced back to some ideas in Wittgenstein’s On Certainty (Wittgenstein 1969)—and, perhaps, also to Ortega’s Ideas y Creencias (Ortega y Gasset 1940)—is that evidential chains have to terminate in beliefs that are not properly said to be either justified or unjustified. This position, which we shall call “Positism” (not to be confused with “positivism”), shares many features with Foundationalism: for instance, both positists and foundationalists agree that inferential chains have to be finite and non-circular. But, whereas the foundationalist thinks that the starting points of inferential chains are beliefs that are justified by something other than beliefs, the positist thinks that the starting points of inferential chains are beliefs that are not justified by anything—they are posits that we have to believe without justification. Despite this difference between the positist and the foundationalist, the positions are structurally similar enough that analogues of the questions posed to the foundationalist can be asked of the  positist.[21] First, then, which beliefs are such that they are not justified and yet are the starting points of every inferential chain—in other words, how do we identify which are the posits? One answer that can be gleamed from Wittgenstein’s On Certainty, which we will call “relativistic Positism”, is that this is a matter that is relative both to time and society, because what the posits are is determined by some function of the actual positing practices of the members of one’s society at a certain time. Thus, according to Wittgenstein, the proposition that no one has been to the moon was a posit for a certain long period of time—it was a proposition that no one felt the need to justify, and that was presupposed in many justificatory practices. For obvious reasons, though, that proposition can no longer appropriately function as a posit. Other epistemologists, “non-relativistic positists”, think that which beliefs are properly posited depends on some objective truth about which beliefs have to be presupposed in order to engage in the practice of justifying beliefs at all. One prime candidate for playing this role is the first-person belief that I am not being deceived by an evil demon into thinking that I am a normally embodied and situated human being (this is the view advocated by Wright 2004 that we already alluded to in section 3.2). The second question, regarding how posits must be related to inferred beliefs in order to justify them, can receive answers that are completely analogous to the foundationalists’. The third question, applied to positism, is the question why certain beliefs are properly posited. Relativistic positists answer that this is so because of a certain societal fact: because they are taken to be so by an appropriate sub-sector of a certain society at a certain time. Non-relativistic positists answer that a certain belief is properly taken as a posit just in case every justificatory act that we engage in presupposes that the belief in question is true. One objection that positists of both sorts have to face is that they are transforming a doxastic necessity into an epistemic virtue—that is, they are concluding that certain beliefs can properly serve as the starting points of inferential chains because that is how in fact they are treated (relativistic Positism) or because otherwise it wouldn’t be possible to engage in inferential practices at all (non-relativistic Positism). The Pyrrhonian skeptic, of course, will reply that the mere fact that most members of a society accept a certain belief without justification, or even the fact that if we don’t do so then we cannot justify anything else, doesn’t mean that it should be accepted without justification. Perhaps the most interesting recent development in relation to Pyrrhonian Skepticism is that more and more epistemologists are arguing that the proper way to reply to Agrippa’s trilemma is to combine some of the positions that, for ease of exposition, we have presented as mutually exclusive. Thus, for example, many contemporary epistemologists put forward theories that contain elements of both Foundationalism and Coherentism (see, for instance, Haack 1993). It is a testament to the endurance of Pyrrhonian Skepticism that philosophers continue in this way to grapple with it.