 What are facts and how may they be distinguished from states of affairs? The Truthmaker-Argument is the main argument for the introduction of facts (see Armstrong 1997: 115ff). It also yields an understanding of the main features of facts. The argument can be summed up as follows: Armstrong takes (P1) to articulate the following intuitive asymmetry: It is true that Socrates is wise because Socrates is wise; but Socrates is not wise because it is true that Socrates is wise (see Armstrong 2004: 4). In Armstrong’s terminology a truth-bearer is true in virtue of (made true by) the existence of another entity, a truth-maker. A truth-maker ensures or guarantees the truth of a truth-bearer. Some authors take this guarantee to be a form of necessitation: x makes it true that p if, and only if, necessarily, if x exists, it is true that p. This brings us to the second premise of the Truthmaker-Argument. Why are facts the best candidates for the truth-maker role? Let us work through some alternatives. Take the thought that Socrates is wise. The existence of which object necessitates its truth? Socrates can exist without being wise. Hence, Socrates is not the truth-maker we are looking for. The last point suggests that only a complex entity that “contains” Socrates as well as the property of being wise is a candidate for the truth-maker role. The mereological sum of Socrates and being wise, that is, the whole that has only Socrates and wisdom as parts, satisfies this condition, yet it cannot fulfill the truth-maker role. If Socrates and wisdom exist, their mereological sum exists. Hence, the sum exists whether it is true that Socrates is wise or not. For similar reasons the set that contains only Socrates and being wise cannot be the truth-maker of the thought that Socrates is wise. Armstrong concludes that only the fact that Socrates is wise that “ties” Socrates and being wise makes it true that Socrates is wise (see Armstrong 1997: 118). Armstrong’s conception of truthmaking is controversial (see, for instance, Restall 1996). I will set its problems aside here and focus on clarifying the relation between facts and states of affairs. Facts “tie” particulars and universals. This brings them close to states of affairs that also involve particulars and universals. What distinguishes them is that the existence of a fact is supposed to guarantee the truth of a truth-bearer. The existence of the fact that a is F can only guarantee the truth of the thought that a is F if one cannot distinguish facts into those that obtain and those that do not obtain. Saying of the fact that Socrates is wise that it obtains is redundant, while it is not redundant to say so of the state of affairs Socrates’ being wise. Facts are also introduced in order to stop a regress of instantiation. Take the particular a and the property of being F and assume that they can exist independently of each other. Given this assumption, there must be a relation that “ties” them together to a’s being F. If the required “tie” is a genuine relation, a regress, usually called Bradley’s regress, ensues: we need to introduce another relation that ties the first relation to a and being F, and so on. Facts are supposed to prevent Bradley’s regress (see Armstrong 1997: 115 and 118; Hossack 2007: 33). How? Relations that tie particulars and properties together are “explained away” in terms of facts that contain particulars and properties: if a instantiates F-ness, it does so because the fact that a is F exists. The existence of this fact guarantees that a is F. Facts are just instantiations of universals by particulars (see Armstrong 1997: 119). Hence, we arrive again at the result that the obtaining/non-obtaining distinction does not apply to facts. In contrast to facts the obtaining/non-obtaining distinction divides states of affairs into those that obtain and those that do not obtain (see  section 1).  For this reason states of affairs cannot be truthmakers: their existence does not necessitate the truth of a truth-bearer. The state of affairs Socrates’ being foolish exists in some possible worlds in which Socrates is foolish, but it also exists in possible worlds in which Socrates is not foolish. Valicella reinforces this point: [Facts] are not to be confused with abstract states of affairs which either obtain or do not obtain depending on how the world is. The latter are themselves in need of something in the world that explains why they obtain. (Valicella 2000: 237) States of affairs contain particulars and properties; facts tie them. This similarity encourages the question whether a fact is nothing but a state of affairs that obtains (see Horwich 1990: 113 who takes true Russellian propositions to be facts). On this view the reason why it is redundant to say that a fact obtains is that a fact is just an obtaining state of affairs. However, the identification of facts with obtaining states of affairs creates problems for the theory of truthmaking. Assume that the fact that Socrates is wise is just the obtaining state of affairs Socrates’ being wise. The fact is supposed to make it true that Socrates is wise. But if the fact is just the obtaining state of affairs Socrates’ being wise, we need in turn something that explains why the state of affairs obtains.  For it seems correct to say “The state of affairs Socrates’ being wise obtains because Socrates is wise”, but not “Socrates is wise because the state of affairs Socrates’ being wise obtains”. Hence, obtaining states of affairs cannot play the same role as facts. They cannot be truth-makers. The question “Why is it true that Socrates is wise?” cannot be conclusively answered by saying “Because Socrates’ being wise obtains”. This answer is in need of a further explanation of the same type as the one we were originally after. A non-obtaining state of affairs cannot be a fact. But can every state of affairs be a recombination of particulars and properties that are combined in some facts? Combinatorialists answer Yes (see, for example, Skyrms 1981; Armstrong 1989: 45ff; Bigelow 1988; Forbes 1989: 137). This idea has two main varieties: Fictionalism: Like ideal gases or frictionless surfaces, possible states of affairs are (useful) fictions; only facts exist. Assume that a is not F. There exists no possible state of affairs a’s being F. But there is the fiction of possible states of affairs according to which there is the state of affairs a’s being F if, and only if, a and being F are contained in some facts (see Armstrong 1989: 46 and 49ff and the entry on  modal fictionalism  for a detailed overview). Representationalism: there are no possible states of affairs, only representations of possible states of affairs (see Lewis 1986: 146 who ascribes this view to Skyrms). These representations are set-theoretic constructs that contain as their members particulars and universals that occur in some facts. For example, if a’s being F and b’s being G are both facts, but the sentence “a is G” is false, there is no state of affairs a’s being G, but there is an ordered-pair that contains a and being G as its members. Representationalism raises the question: what distinguishes a (possible) state of affairs from a mere representation of it? Why is the state of affairs a’s being G not simply the ordered pair of a and being G? We will come back to this question in  section 5.