 As with many ideas discussed in contemporary philosophy of language, the idea that propositions are structured is present in Gottlob Frege’s writings. Frege had a view both about the constituents of structured propositions and about what held these constituents together in the proposition. Frege held that simple linguistic expressions are associated with entities he called senses. Though there is some controversy about precisely how to understand the notion of sense, Frege explicitly distinguishes the sense of a linguistic expression from both the subjective ideas speakers associate with the expression and the thing in the world the expression “stands for”. Further, the sense of an expression determines what thing in the world the expression stands for. Thus the sense of a proper name such as ‘Ronald Reagan’ must be distinguished from any subjective ideas speakers associate with the name (e.g. feelings of anger, fondness, etc.) and from Reagan himself. And the sense of the name “picks out” Reagan as the thing in the world the name stands for. It may help to think of the sense as some descriptive condition satisfied uniquely by Reagan (and not to think any more about what is meant by a descriptive condition). Complex linguistic expressions are also associated with senses. And Frege held that the sense of a complex expression is a function of the senses of its simple parts and how they are put together. Frege called propositions thoughts (Gedanken), and held that the thought/proposition expressed by a sentence is itself a sense. And, like the senses of other complex linguistic expressions, the proposition/thought expressed by a sentence is a function of the senses of the words in the sentence and how they are put together. Now Frege at least sometimes appears to hold the stronger view that the sense of a sentence (proposition/thought) has as constituents the senses of the words in the sentence. And as the following quotation shows, his account of how these sense-constituents are held together in the proposition/thought depends on different kinds of linguistic expressions having different kinds of senses: Remarks like this suggest that Frege’s view was that propositions are complex entities whose parts are other senses. The proposition is held together in virtue of the fact that at least one of the senses is unsaturated (Frege sometimes also says predicative, or in need of supplementation). Other senses “saturate” or complete the unsaturated senses and in so doing are bound to them to form the proposition/thought. Thus, on this way of interpreting Frege, the mechanism for binding together the constituents of a structured proposition is built right into some of the constituents, (recall that this was true of the view of Zalta [1988] as well).