 Because the structured proposition view arose in large part due to dissatisfaction with the then prevailing view of propositions, discussing this other account of propositions will help to illuminate structured proposition views. The late 1950s and 1960s saw the development of a new sort of model theory, “possible worlds semantics”, for systems of modal logic. In the framework of possible world semantics, linguistic expressions are assigned extensions “at” possible worlds. Thus, e.g. names, n-place predicates and sentences are assigned individuals, sets of n-tuples of individuals, and truth values, respectively, at different possible worlds. Intuitively, possible worlds are to be thought of as “ways things could have been”, and the assignment of (possibly different) extensions to expressions at different possible worlds is part of capturing this intuition. Thus there might have been more or fewer cows, and this is reflected in the fact that the extension of ‘cow’ (intuitively, the set of things that are cows) can vary from possible world to possible world. Because we wish the extensions of expressions to vary from possible world to possible world (at least in some cases), it is natural to associate with each expression a function from possible worlds to extensions appropriate to that sort of expression. Thus we associate with names, functions from possible worlds to individuals; with n-place predicates functions from possible worlds to sets of n-tuples; and with sentences, functions from possible worlds to truth values. Such functions from possible worlds to extensions of the appropriate sort are often called intensions of the expressions in question, and the term ‘intension’ shall be used this way throughout the present  work.[5]  Now since most think that the extensions of sentences are truth values, as indicated above, the intension of a sentence is a function from possible worlds to truth values. Intuitively, it maps a world to true if the sentence is true at that world. Thus the intension of a sentence can be seen as the primary bearer of truth and falsity at a world: the sentence has the truth value it has at the world in virtue of its intension mapping that world to that truth value. Further, modal operators were typically construed as operating on the intensions of the sentences they embed, and so those intensions could plausibly be thought of as possessing modal properties. Since propositions were traditionally held to be the primary bearers of truth and falsity and the bearers of modal properties, it was natural for possible world semanticists to identify propositions with functions from possible worlds to truth values (sentential intensions), or equivalently, sets of possible worlds (the set of possible worlds at which the sentence in question is true). Indeed, this identification was thought by many to vindicate the previously mysterious notion of a  proposition.[6]  Possible worlds were apparently needed for the model theory of modal logic anyway; why not build propositions out of them? Current structured proposition accounts arose largely out of dissatisfaction with the idea that propositions are sets of possible worlds (or functions from worlds to truth values). In fact, there were at least two quite distinct motivations for abandoning the view of propositions as sets of worlds and adopting the structured proposition account. The first had to do with the way propositions are individuated on a possible worlds account. The view that propositions are sets of possible worlds does not individuate propositions very finely. For example, consider any pair of sentences that express metaphysically necessary propositions, say ‘Bachelors are unmarried’ and ‘Brothers are male siblings’. Since these propositions are true in all possible worlds, each must be the set of all possible worlds. But there is only one such set. Thus there is only one such proposition! Hence these two sentences express the same proposition. (The view also predicts that all true sentences of mathematics express the same (necessary) proposition, that any two necessarily equivalent sentences express the same proposition, that the conjunction of any sentence S with a necessarily true sentence expresses the same proposition as S, and so on.) This should make clear that the account of propositions as sets of worlds is not a structured proposition account. For, as we saw, on a structured proposition account, the semantic values of expressions in a sentence are recoverable from the proposition expressed by the sentence, since those semantic values are constituents of the proposition. This is why on such an account, ‘Bachelors are unmarried males’ and ‘Brothers are male siblings’ express distinct propositions: the propositions have different constituents. But on the possible worlds account, the property of being a bachelor is in no sense recoverable from or a constituent of the proposition expressed by ‘Bachelors are unmarried’. For the latter proposition is just the set of all possible worlds. How could the property of being a bachelor be “recovered” from this set? Similarly, the property of being a brother is not recoverable from the proposition expressed by ‘Brothers are male siblings.’ Again, the latter proposition is just the set of all possible worlds. Further, if propositions are sets of possible worlds, belief is construed as a relation between individuals and propositions and sentences of the form ‘A believes that P’ assert that the individual A stands in the belief relation to the proposition expressed by ‘P’, then for any necessarily equivalent sentences ‘P’ and ‘Q’, ‘A believes that P’ and ‘A believes that Q’ cannot differ in truth value. This means that, for example, if ‘A believes that 1+1=2’ is true, so is ‘A believes that there is no greatest natural number’. These consequences of the view that propositions are sets of possible worlds were appreciated early on; and theorists made a variety of attempts to make these consequences seem less unpalatable. Despite these valiant efforts, many philosophers viewed these consequences as a sign that there was something very wrong with the view that propositions are sets of possible worlds. Thus, philosophers were open to an account of propositions that individuated propositions more finely than the possible worlds account. As we have seen, the structured proposition account is just such an account. In order to make clear the second motivation for abandoning the view of propositions as sets of worlds and adopting the structured proposition account, we must discuss the notions of rigid designation and direct reference. A rigid designator is an expression that designates the same individual in all possible circumstances or worlds. In the early 1970’s, Saul Kripke argued in Naming and Necessity that ordinary proper names are rigid designators. Kripke claimed that when we consider a sentence containing an ordinary proper name, such as Aristotle was a great philosopher and ask whether it would have been true or false in various counterfactual circumstances, it is the properties of the very same man, Aristotle, in those circumstances that are relevant to the truth of the sentence. So, ‘Aristotle’ designates the same man in these various counterfactual circumstances; it is a rigid designator. At around the same time, David Kaplan argued that indexicals (e.g. ‘I’, ‘here’, ‘now’) and demonstratives (e.g. ‘that’, ‘you’, ‘he’) are directly referential. Concerning directly referential expressions, Kaplan wrote: Thus, a directly referential expression is a rigid designator: its associated semantic rules determine the actual referent of the expression (in a context) and when evaluating what is said by the sentence containing the expression (in that context) in other possible circumstances, this same referent is always relevant. To illustrate, if John utters I ski. at the present time and we want to evaluate whether what John said by means of that utterance is true or false in other possible circumstances, it is John’s properties in those other circumstances that are relevant. Thus, ‘I’ is rigid: when evaluating the truth or falsity of what is said by an utterance of a sentence containing ‘I’ in counterfactual circumstances, it is the properties of the person whom ‘I’ referred to in the utterance (the actual utterer) that are relevant. Kaplan intended to contrast directly referential expressions with expressions such as definite descriptions, which, though designating particular individuals, do so by means of descriptive conditions being expressed by the description and satisfied by the designated individual. Thus Kaplan wrote that directly referential expressions “refer directly without the mediation of Fregean Sinn as meaning”. (Kaplan [1977] p. 483) The designation of definite descriptions is mediated by something like a Fregean sense (i.e. their associated descriptive conditions). Of course, even if descriptions are not directly referential, some are rigid designators. For example, ‘the successor of 1’ designates the same individual (2) in all possible worlds. So, though all directly referential expressions are rigid designators, some rigid designators are not directly referential. As was mentioned above, in a possible worlds semantics linguistic expressions are associated with intensions, functions from possible worlds to appropriate extensions. In the case of expressions designating individuals, these intensions will be functions from possible worlds to individuals. Note that all rigid designators (whether directly referential or not) will have intensions that are constant functions: they will be functions that map all possible worlds to the same individual. Thus possible worlds semantics tends to blur the distinction between directly referential expressions and rigid non-directly referential expressions (e.g. rigid definite descriptions). To make the distinction between directly referential expressions and rigid non-directly referential expressions more vivid, Kaplan invoked the notion of structured propositions: If I may wax metaphysical in order to fix an image, let us think of the vehicles of evaluation—the what-is-said in a given context—as propositions. Don’t think of propositions as sets of possible worlds, but rather as structured entities looking something like the sentences which express them. For each occurrence of a singular term in a sentence there will be a corresponding constituent in the proposition expressed. The constituent of the proposition determines, for each circumstance of evaluation, the object relevant to evaluating the proposition in that circumstance. In general the constituent of the proposition will be some sort of complex, constructed from various attributes by logical composition. But in the case of a singular term which is directly referential, the constituent of the proposition is just the object itself. Thus it is that it does not just turn out that the constituent determines the same object in every circumstance, the constituent (corresponding to a rigid designator) just is the object. There is no determining to do at all. On this picture—and this is really a picture and not a theory—the definite description would yield a constituent which is complex although it would determine the same object in all circumstances. Thus, (1), though a rigid designator, is not directly referential from this (metaphysical) point of view. (Kaplan [1977] p. 494–495) (Kaplan goes on to attribute this “metaphysical picture” of structured propositions to Russell.) Adopting this structured proposition account makes it simple to distinguish between directly referential expressions and other expressions, rigid or not. Directly referential expressions contribute their referents (in a context) to the propositions expressed (in that context) by the sentences containing them. Non-directly referential expressions contribute some complex that may or may not determine the same individual in all possible circumstances. Thus the desire to distinguish clearly between directly referential expressions and other rigid designators prompted Kaplan to re-introduce the Russellian notion of a structured proposition into the philosophical literature (see the discussion of Russell below). However, Kaplan [1977] tends to treat the notion of a structured proposition as a heuristic device. He repeatedly calls it a picture, explicitly says that it is not part of his theory, and in his formal semantics he adopts the possible worlds account of propositions (contents of formulae), taking them to be functions from worlds (and times) to truth values. Many current direct reference theorists take the structured proposition account much more seriously. It is part of their theory in the sense that when they say that an expression is directly referential they are literally saying that it contributes its referent to propositions expressed by sentences containing it, (e.g. see the discussion of Salmon and Soames below).