 As noted in the previous section, a crucial feature of content is that it legitimates semantic evaluations. While teleological theories of mental content come in a variety of forms, they all share the idea that the norms that underwrite these evaluations depend, in part at least, on functions. The next section explains various ideas about the nature of this dependence. This section describes the notion of function that is employed. It is generally thought to be in some sense teleological and normative but both “teleological” and “normative” need qualifying.  Let's take the first term first. Talk of biological functions often has a teleological flavor. For example, when we say that it is the function of the heart to pump blood this seems equivalent to saying that hearts are for pumping blood or that hearts are there in order to pump blood. There is a closely related concept of an artifact's function that is purposive: for example, when we say that moving the cursor is the function of the computer's mouse or trackpad we seem to mean that this is what it is for, that it is there in order to do this, that this is what its designers designed it to do. Along analogous lines, when biologists say that pumping blood is the heart's function, they seem to mean that hearts were selected for, adapted for and in that sense designed for pumping blood. In the latter case, however, the selection is “natural” or, better, it is a non-intentional process. Some who favor teleological theories of mental content claim that Mother Nature is intentional or purposive.  In the case of Millikan (2002), it is unclear whether there is a genuine as opposed to terminological disagreement with the substance of the preceding paragraph. The transition from metaphor to dead metaphor to literal use of such terms as “design” and “purpose” is a matter of degree and Millikan seems to use “function” and “biological purpose” as synonyms.  However, Dennett's (1988) claim is that there is no mind-independent determinate fact of the matter about meanings or functions and that the functions of artifacts, the functions of biological systems and the contents of the thoughts of people are all dependent on interpretation, on our adopting either the design stance or the intentional stance toward them.  In Dennett's view, nature leaves functions and meanings similarly indeterminate. There are some who would prefer to reserve the term “teleological” for genuinely purposive contexts in the most literal sense of “purposive” and to refer to biological functions as “teleonomic.” But, on a broader construal of what it means for a concept to be teleological, a concept might be counted as teleological if it concerns what something is for, and the notion of what something was selected for counts as teleological in that sense. This is the sense of the term “teleological” used in this entry. Intuitively, the relevant concept of function seems to be normative as well, for biologists routinely talk about systems functioning normally or properly, as well as about malfunctioning, dysfunction, functional impairment and so on. Those who offer teleological theories of mental content agree that the relevant notion of function permits the possibility of malfunction; it allows that a token trait could have a function to do Z even if it lacks the disposition to do Z.  For example, Joe's pineal gland could have the function to secrete melatonin even if it cannot secrete melatonin because it is malfunctioning.  Whether it is appropriate to describe this as “normative” is more controversial but the disagreement is more terminological than substantial among those offering teleological theories of mental content, since all that is usually meant by saying that the notion is normative, by those of them who say this, is that it permits the possibility of malfunction. Some prefer to reserve the term “normative” for prescriptive contexts. On that way of speaking, a statement would count as normative only if it entails an ought-claim without the addition of further premises. Proponents of teleological theories of mental content can agree that no ought-claim follows from a function ascription without the addition of further premises (for discussion, see Jacob (2001)) and that functions are not prescriptive. Different practices dominate different discourses but talk of purely descriptive “norms” is well established in some contexts (e.g., in talk of statistical norms). If either psycho-semantic or functional norms were prescriptive, the attempt to naturalize them would seem to ignore Hume's warning to beware trying to derive ought-statements from is-statements, but those who offer teleological theories of mental content claim that the norms of both functions and content fall on the is side of any is/ought divide. Those who favor teleological theories of content usually favor an etiological theory of functions, according to which an item's function is determined by its history of selection or by past selection of things of that type. Roughly, on an etiological theory of functions, an items function is what it was selected for, or what thing of the type were selected for. Wright (1973, 1976) offered the first developed defense of an etiological theory of functions by a philosopher but earlier expressions of the idea can be found in the writings of some biologists (e.g., Ayala 1970). Wright's (1976, p.81) proposed analysis is as follows. Wright intended this formula to work for a wide variety of function ascriptions; for artifacts as well as the parts of organisms, and for function ascriptions in Creationist as well as Evolutionary biology. For this reason, he intended the “does” of the second requirement to be tenseless. Thus the second requirement is intended to be read as requiring that X be there because it does, did or will do Z.  The precise tense would depend on the nature of the relevant consequence etiology, the causal history that explains X being there because of its effect, Z. The details of this formula are often regarded as problematic.  For instance, it is unclear how it renders malfunction possible, given the first requirement.  The second requirement is also too loose to capture only function-conferring consequence etiologies. As Wright (2010) concedes, if a man's gripping a pole were to cause electricity to run through him and this prevented him from letting go of the pole, then his original analysis entails that the function of the man's holding on to the pole is to allow electricity to run through him. In light of this problem, Wright has amended his analysis by proposing that what is needed is a particular kind of consequence etiology, a “virtue etiology” in which the consequence implicated in the etiology must be a “virtue”.  In the case of functions derived from natural selection, he views a “virtuous” consequence as an adaptive consequence. Others who offer etiological theories of function drop Wright's first requirement and speak more specifically of selection as the background process that is responsible for the consequence etiology. On this view, a/the function of an item is (roughly) what it (or items of the type) were selected for.  Millikan (1989a) and Neander (1983, 1991) argue that the functions of biology can be precisified by background theory and that their analysis need not be an ordinary language analysis. Neander (1991, p. 74) gives the following definition for functions in physiology in particular, for instance: Etiological theories of biological function need to allow for the fact that ancestral traits might have been selected for something other than the present function of descendent traits.  For example, a penguin's flippers and an emu's vestigial wings no longer have the function of flight, even though ancestral forelimbs were selected for flight.  Griffiths (1993) and Godfrey-Smith (1994) offer “modern history” versions of the etiological theory, according to which functions are determined by recent selection.  Note that selection does not cease when traits “go to fixation” if on-going maintenance selection is still weeding out fresh harmful mutations as they arise.  However, selection does require some variation and Schwartz (1999) suggests that a continuing usefulness supplement is needed, which kicks in if variation is absent for a time.  In the absence of any variation, the trait retains its function if it is still adaptive. A further issue is whether the etiological theory is circular (see e.g., Nanay (2011)).  The worry is that, if a trait token is typed by its function and if a trait's function depends on the selection history that pertains to the relevant type, the analysis is circular. Neander and Rosenberg (forthcoming) respond that the function of a trait and its function-specific type co-supervene on the history of selection and that there is only a superficial appearance of circularity. To figure out if token trait X has the function to Z, they say, first identify the lineage of traits to which X belongs; a lineage of traits connects ancestral and descendent traits by the mechanisms responsible for inheritance. Then segment the lineage at those places where selection for Z stops and starts.  X has the function to Z only if there was selection for X-ing in X's segment of the lineage. This procedure does not presuppose prior knowledge of X's function or prior knowledge of X's membership in a function-specific classification of traits. This is also an alternative proposal for handling vestigiality. To play a role in a naturalistic account of mental content, the relevant selection process must be non-intentional but it need not be natural selection operating over an evolutionary span of time. Millikan (1984) offers an etiological theory of functions on which functions can also result from meme selection. Papineau (1984) speaks of learning and Dretske (1986) invokes functions that depend on recruitment by conditioning. Garson (2011) argues that the notion of selection should be loosened so that differential retention without differential replication could count as selection, in which case neural selection could count as a form of selection that could underwrite the functions that underwrite content.  While the contents of sensory-perceptual representations might be determined by the functions that derive from natural selection operating over an evolutionary span of time, the role of learning in concept acquisition suggests that other kinds of functions that derive from other kinds of selection might be needed for the contents of learned concepts. There is, though, no established agreement about how best to more broadly define the relevant class of functions. While etiological theories dominate the discussion of normative functions in philosophy of biology, the etiological theory is not uncontroversial. Some question whether teleology can be naturalized (e.g., Bedau (1991)). Others support other theories for other reasons. Perhaps the systemic theory is the most popular alternative (see esp. Cummins (1975)).  Systemic theories of function emphasize the role of function ascriptions in functional analyses of systems. Functional analyses of systems conceptually decompose complex activities of whole systems into the activities of their contributing parts.  The function of a part is its contribution to the complex activity of the system that is under analysis.  Proponents of the etiological theory have no objection to the idea that biologists give functional analyses of systems but contend that the systemic analysis, on its own, fails to naturalize the normativity of functions or to do so successfully.  Some who support a systemic theory argue that biology has no need for a naturalistic notion of malfunction (e.g., Davies, 2001), while others argue that abnormal functioning is statistically atypical (Boorse (2002), Craver (2001), Lewens (2004)). (Readers who would like to read more on this and other theories of function could turn to several volumes of readings that have appeared: see esp. Allen, Bekoff & Lauder (1998), Buller (1999) and Ariew, Cummins & Perlman (2002).) It is usual to note that etiological (teleological) functions are distinct from the causal-role functions involved in what is usually called “functionalism” in philosophy of mind. Causal-role functions are often defined as a select subset of a trait's actual causal dispositions, and functionalism is often defined as the view that mental states are individuated or classified into types on the basis of such dispositions (see, e.g., Block (1984)). If causal-role functions are a subset of dispositions actually possessed by token traits then they do not permit the possibility of malfunction because a trait cannot have the causal-role function to Z and at the same time lack the disposition to Z. That said, the distinction between functionalism and what might be termed “teleo-functionalism” is less stark than might be thought. One reason is that formulations of classical functionalism often spoke of the characteristic or normal causal roles of mental states.  Sometimes this was explicitly to allow for pathology (see, e.g., Lewis 1980).  Another reason is that, although teleological functions are often said to be selected effects or effects for which traits were selected, such functions can also be described as selected dispositions or dispositions for which traits were selected. Both forms of functionalism also permit multiple physical realizability of traits that perform the same functions.