 The preceding survey of teleological theories of content does not mention all of the extant teleological theories but it illustrates some of the commonalities and differences among them. Now we turn to some objections that have been raised against the general idea of teleosemantics. This section looks at the objections that have been most influential. Some have already been touched on in previous sections. There are several potential indeterminacy problems. Aside from the problem of distal content, which has already been discussed above in relation to the different theories that treat it in different ways, there are two other indeterminacy problems.  One concerns the fact that natural selection is extensional (Fodor, 1990b) and the other concerns the fact that natural selection selects traits for complex causal roles (Neander, 1995).  Both problems can perhaps be attributed to Dretske (1986), though Dretske did not distinguish them from the problem of distal content, the problem he seems primarily to have been interested in solving. Fodor once devised a teleological theory of mental content (published years later, as Fodor 1990a). However, he quickly repudiated the idea and has since been one of the most vigorous critics of the general idea. His main objection was initially that teleological theories leave content indeterminate because functions are indeterminate. Functional indeterminacy, according to Fodor (1990b), stems from the fact that natural selection is extensional in the following sense: if it is adaptive for an organism, O, to do something, M, in the presence of environmental feature, F, and F is reliably co-extensive with another feature, G, then it is equally adaptive for O to do M in the presence of G. Fodor argues that teleological theories therefore cannot distinguish between candidate contents that are co-extensional in the environment in which a creature evolved. Fodor's example is the frog that snaps at anything that is suitably small, dark and moving and thereby feeds itself. According to Fodor, if it was adaptive for the frog to snap at flies then it was equally adaptive for it to snap at small, dark, moving things on the simplifying assumption that flies and small, dark, moving things were reliably co-extensive in the frog's natural habitat. According to Fodor, we can equally well say that the function of the device is to detect flies and that its function is to detect small, dark, moving things. So, if we try to determine the content of the representation by reference to the function of the detection mechanism, the content remains indeterminate. We can choose to describe the function one way or another but if the content depends on how we choose to describe the function it is not a naturalized content. Note that the candidate contents fly and frog food and small, dark moving thing each license different assessments concerning misrepresentation.  If the frog is representing the stimulus as a fly, for instance, it misrepresents something that is small, dark and moving that is not a fly, using the relevant representation. If it represents the stimulus as small, dark and moving, it does not. The standard response to this objection starts by pointing out that the function of a trait is what that type of trait was selected for and that the notion of selection for is a causal notion (Sterelny 1990, Millikan 1991). A trait is selected for its possession of a certain property only if that property causally contributed to selection of traits of the type (see Sober 1984). The heart was selected for circulating blood but not for making a thumping noise even though the two co-occured. It was selected for pumping rather than thumping given that the pumping but not the thumping causally contributed to the inclusive fitness of ancestral creatures and thus causally contributed to the selection of hearts. Functions can therefore distinguish between two properties that reliably co-vary as long as one but not caused the trait to be selected. This point has mostly been well-taken. However, appeal to selection for does not suffice to disambiguate content (Griffiths & Goode 1995, Neander 1995). In the case of the frog's detection device, its responding to small, dark, moving things and its helping the frog to catch and swallow something nutritious both played a causal role in selection of the relevant representation producing or consuming systems. It was by detecting small, dark moving things that the frog got fed. So neither the detecting of something small, dark and moving, nor the eating of something nutritious was a mere side-effect or mere piggy back trait.  We return to this issue in a moment. Fodor (1996) anyway continues to object that there is a remainder of a problem along these lines because content, he claims, is more fine-grained than selection histories can account for. He maintains that teleological theories cannot discriminate contents finely enough when there are properties that are logically or nomologically co-extensive.  Being triangular (being a closed plane figure with three straight sides) and being trilateral (being a closed plane figure with three inner angles) are logically co-extensive properties. Being a renate (a creature with a kidney) and being a cordate (a creature with a heart) are (Fodor assumes) nomologically co-extensive. According to Fodor, we cannot distinguish between selection for adaptive responses in the presence of one versus the other of two such properties.  We can represent each distinctly but, according to Fodor, selection histories are not sufficiently fine-grained to distinguish such contents. Consider the two options: either the causal powers of two co-extensional properties F and G are distinct or they are not distinct. Suppose first that they are not distinct. On some plausible and medium-grained theories of property individuation, properties are individuated by their causal powers, so if there is no difference in the causal powers of F and G, they are the same property on such a theory. On this way of individuating properties, a representation that refers to the one must refer to the other too and so there is no problem here for a theory of referential content. On this way of thinking, if there is no distinction between the causal powers of triangularity and trilaterality, any difference in the mental representations TRIANGULAR and TRILATERAL must be a difference of a different sort. It might be a difference in representational vehicle, or in other words, the two might be different predicates denoting the same property. They might, consistent with this, differ in their cognitive roles. Alternatively, modest theories can maintain that these two representations are semantically complex, in which case there might be a difference (even a referential difference) in the constituent concepts out of which TRIANGULAR and TRILATERAL are composed (e.g., one mentions angles and one does not). Suppose, on the other hand, that F and G do have distinct causal powers.  Most would agree that this is in fact the case if X is the property of being a creature with a kidney and Y is the property of being a creature with a heart. In that case, this version of the objection does not get off the ground. If the causal powers of the properties differ, they can play different roles in selection histories.  Consider, for example, the proposal that the contents of sensory-perceptual representations are (so to speak) their Normal causes.  A system can have a disposition to be caused by Fs to do M, without having a disposition to be caused by Gs to do M, if F and G have distinct causal powers even (if they are co-extensive). The system can be selected for the one disposition that it has but it cannot be selected for the disposition that it does not have. Fodor's objection has evolved into a general objection to any adaptational explanation and to the very notion of selection for.  It would take too much space to follow the trail further here.  (See Fodor and Piatelli-Palmarini 2010 and see esp. Block and Kitcher 2010 and Sober 2011 (Other Internet Resources) for effective critical discussion). We turn now to the second functional indeterminacy problem. It stems from the fact that organic systems are selected for complex causal roles, as indicated earlier. For example, a gene in an antelope might have been selected because it (i) altered the shape of hemoglobin, (ii) which increased oxygen uptake, (iii) which allowed the antelope to move to higher ground, (iv) which gave them access to richer pasture in summer, (v) and so improved their nutritional status, their immunity to disease, their vigor in avoiding predation, their attraction to mates and (vi) their chances of survival and reproduction (Neander, 1995). To determine the function of a trait, such as the altered shape of the hemoglobin, the etiological theory of functions tells us to ask, “what did past instances do that was adaptive and that caused traits of that type to be selected?”. In this case, the answer is (ii) through (vi).  The altered shape of the hemoglobin did all of this, and all of this was adaptive, and all of this contributed to the selection of the trait (i.e., it was selected for all of this). So all of this would seem to be the trait's function.  Its function is the complex causal role for which it was selected. The problem for content can be seen when we consider mechanisms that produce or consume representations.  For instance, the frog's detection device was selected because it (a) responded to small, dark, moving things and (b) that helped the frog catch these things, and (c) that provided the frog with nutrients and (d) that contributed to the frog's chances of survival and reproduction in various ways. Thus ancestral detection devices contributed to the selection of that type of device by way of a complex causal route in which the visible configuration of the stimulus and the nutritional properties of the stimulus both play a role. Note that this does not depend on these features of the environment being co-extensional. Even if not all small, dark and moving things were nutritious and not all nutritious things were small, dark and moving in the frog's natural habitat, this problem of complex causal roles would still remain.  The problem is that the systems responsible for the production and the consumption of representations were selected for complex causal roles in which a number of environmental features were involved. Agar (1993) supports the idea that the frog's representation represents small, dark, moving food, a content intended to incorporate all of the properties causally responsible for the selection. Price (1998, 2001) claims that, contrary to what has just been said, there is a unique, correct function ascription for each trait and she elaborates a number of principles to isolate the unique, correct function ascription. Enc (2002) endorses Price's claim that function ascriptions must be determinate if any teleological theory of content is to succeed but raises problems for her attempt to show that function ascriptions are suitably determinate. However, teleological theories of content do not merely gesture toward functions and leave it at that. Consider again the causal theory discussed in the preceding section.  The content of the frog's sensory-perceptual representation is not indeterminate between the configuration of visible features and something nutritious on that theory, since the frog's visual system was not selected for producing the relevant sensory-perceptual representation in response to the nutritional value of the stimulus. A frog's visual system is not causally sensitive to the presence or absence of nutrients and could not have been selected for a causal sensitivity it did not have.  The general point here is that teleological theories of content appeal to functions in certain ways and one must examine the particular theory to see if the theory isolates a sufficiently determinate content. In responding to the indeterminacy problem, Millikan (1991) might be thought to rely on the fact that, on her theory, it is the proper function of the consumer and not that of the producer of the representation that determines its content.  For instance, in discussing Dretske's magnetesome example she says that, “[t]he mechanisms THAT USE the magnetesome's offerings don't care at all whether the magnet points to magnetic north, geomagnetic north or, say, to the North Star. The only one of the conditions Dretske mentioned that is necessary FOR THE USER'S PROPER FUNCTIONING is that the magnet point in the direction of lesser oxygen” (Millikan (1991, 163) original emphasis). However, it seems (to this author) that Millikan's emphasis here does not put the emphasis in the right place for her theory.  Recall that one consumer of the frog's perceptual representation is the motor control system which controls the frog's orienting toward the stimulus.  We can describe its function as controlling the frog's orienting toward frog food, but we could also describe it as controlling the frog's orienting toward small, dark, moving things.  A mere appeal to consumers would seem to shift the problem without solving it. However, it does not follow that Millikan's theory leaves content indeterminate. It is Millikan's appeal to Normal conditions that does more work in disambiguating the content for her. Finally, some proponents of teleological theories do not think that content is determinate in the cases used to illustrate the alleged problem. Dennett (1995) maintains that such content indeterminacy is unproblematic. Papineau (1997) maintains that content is indeterminate in the case of a creatures that lacks a belief-desire psychological structure. Whether a creature lacks a belief-desire structure will in part depend on how we construe this requirement. It is not straightforward whether frogs lack a belief-desire psychological structure given that they have both informational and motivational states. Nonetheless, Papineau is probably right that the informational and motivational states are not so distinct as ours and he might also be right that content indeterminacy at this level is unproblematic.  We will, however, need to resolve related content indeterminacy problems for human mental states. Another objection that has been influential is the Swampman objection. Swampman-style examples have been around for some time. Boorse (1976) imagines a population of rabbits accidentally coalescing into existence as a counter-example to Wright's etiological theory of functions. Boorse's claim was that we could ascribe functions to the rabbits' parts even if the rabbits lacked any selection-history. Swampman in particular was raised by Davidson (1987) as a potential objection to his own historical (but not teleological) theory of content. When Swampman comes into existence he is a synchronic (at a time, but not extended over time) physical replica of Davidson at a certain point in time (t). Swampman's history differs radically from Davidson's because he comes into existence as a result of a purely accidental collision of elementary particles. Crucially, he does not partake in our evolutionary history or have any other evolutionary history or any developmental history of his own. Nor is he created by God or copied from Davidson by a machine. The resemblance between Davidson and Swampman is nothing but a stupendous coincidence.  Swampman's appearance of design is deceptive because he in no way derives from any design process, natural or intentional. Swampman's component parts have no functions according to an etiological theory of function and so his “brain” states have no contents according to a teleological theory of mental content. Many people find these results highly counter-intuitive, especially the result that Swampman lacks all intentional states. Assuming physicalism, we could substitute Swampman for Davidson and no one, including his most intimate friends and family, would detect a difference. Swampman would make noises that his friends and family would interpret as witty, interesting and meaningful but, according to teleological theories (and Davidson's own theory of content) Swampman has no ideas about philosophy, no perceptions of his surroundings and no beliefs or desires about anything at all. There are two broad strategies in responding to this objection. One is to try to loosen the grip of the intuition that Swampman has intentional states and the other is to argue that any intuitions that remain do not show that teleological theories are wrong. In either case, it is important to isolate the relevant intuition because, by all accounts, Swampman would have much that Davidson had at t. All of the chemical activity in Davidson's brain when he understood words, for example, would occur in Swampman's brain-analog and certain descriptions of this activity will apply to both equally: e.g., physical, chemical and formal descriptions of it. Further, it is trivial that Swampman has narrow content if “narrow content” is defined as whatever most closely approximates content that nonetheless supervenes on just the narrow physical states of an individual at a time and “from the skin in.” By definition, whatever narrow content Davidson's mental states had at t, Swampman's inner states had too, since Swampman is at t physically indistinguishable “from the skin in” from Davidson at t. What teleological theories entail is that Swampman, no matter what narrow content he has, lacks regular normative content. The intuition that conflicts with teleological theories, therefore, is that Swampman's inner states, which are narrowly identical to Davidson's, are true, false, accurate or inaccurate in the usual sense. It is clear that, if Swampman's inner states do have truth-evaluable contents, they cannot always have the same truth values as Davidson's. Everyone will probably agree that, at t, Swampman cannot remember his past life since at most he could only have pseudo-memories of Davidson's. Everyone will also agree that Swampman cannot correctly think that he is returning home to his wife and sitting in his house, since the house and the wife are not his. Further, it should be kept in mind that many think that Putnam (1975) has shown that the contents of natural kind concepts do not supervene on just what is “in the head.” If Putnam-style twin cases can be constructed for other mental representations and their contents as well (see Burge 1979, 1986) then Swampman's lack of history might anyway be an issue even before considering the further complication of a teleological theory. It thus requires careful analysis with respect to controversial issues to determine just what intuitions about Swampman would tell against the externalism of teleological theories in particular. Those who try to dislodge any remaining intuitions against teleological theories argue that an appearance of design can be misleading. (Recall that “design” here includes the mechanical design-work of natural selection.) Consider, for example, Boorse's swamprabbits. It might be intuitive to attribute functions to their eye-analogs. But in nature nothing so intricately organized as if for the performance of a function fails to be the result of a design process. It is argued that habits of thought, which usually take us from an appearance of design to a function ascription, lead to false ascriptions in purely hypothetical unrealistic cases (Neander 1991).  Dretske (1996) argues the case with another imaginary example. Twin-Tercel, a random replica of his old Tercel, comes about as the result of a freakish storm in a junk yard. It is molecule-for-molecule identical to his old Tercel, except that its “gas-gauge” does not move in relation to the amount of gas in its “tank”. We might be tempted to say that the thing is broken, but Dretske says that there is no basis for saying that it does not work because to say that it does not work implies that it was designed to do something it cannot do and it was not designed to do anything. If we should reform our intuitions in the one case, perhaps we should also reform them in the case of Swampman's intentionality, he says. We might grant Dretske his claim about Twin-Tercel and yet resist the move from functions to intentionality. The problem for theories of content, as opposed to theories of function, is exacerbated by the relation between intentionality and consciousness. Many philosophers find it plausible that an individual's phenomenal consciousness at a time supervenes on just the inner physical properties of that individual at that time. If this narrow supervenience thesis is true, then Swampman will have phenomenal consciousness when he comes into existence, assuming Davidson did at t. However, it is hard to see how we can attribute phenomenal consciousness to Swampman without also attributing some intentional states to him. Suppose, for example, that Swampman has a red-sensation. Then presumably it will seem to him that he is seeing something red. But it seeming to him that he is seeing something red is presumably an intentional state. Here we connect with another important issue that lies outside of the scope of this entry. However, a couple of points can be made. First, some proponents of teleological theories of content are not troubled by this line of argument because they reject the view that consciousness supervenes on narrow states and hold theories of phenomenal consciousness that deny consciousness to Swampman. According to some, phenomenal consciousness supervenes on (non-narrow) content, so if Swampman lacks content he must also lack phenomenal consciousness on this view (see esp. Dretske 1995). If, though, any proponents of teleosemantics accept the narrow supervenience thesis for phenomenal consciousness, they cannot deny that Swampman would have phenomenal consciousness. In that case, the objection remains in force.  Then there appear to be just two options. One is to maintain that Swampman can have a red sensation without it seeming to him that he sees something red. The other is to maintain that, although it seems to Swampman that he sees something red, this seeming is not truth-evaluable in the usual sense. This last option fits with the traditional idea that seemings have a special epistemic status; it fits with the idea that we cannot be mistaken about how things seem to us and that, in that context, misrepresentation is not possible.  It does not, however, fit with the idea that a person is, in principle, always fallible with respect even to how things seem. The second broad strategy is to argue that Swampman intuitions cannnot show that teleological theories are incorrect because they are irrelevant. They are, it can be argued, not to the point if a teleological theory is offered as a real-nature theory (Millikan (1996), Neander (1996)).  The analogy with an a posteriori analysis of the nature of water is thought to be helpful here. Recall that XYZ is an imaginary liquid that is superficially indistinguishable from water (H2O), although it has a different molecular constitution (dubbed “XYZ”). We can, it is argued, agree that “water” and WATER can refer to H2O exclusively, even if all of the members of the relevant community would classify XYZ as water were they to find some, given their ignorance of water's chemical composition. Following Kripke and Putnam, many have been persuaded that “water” and WATER might have referred to H2O exclusively, even before it was known that water is H2O, because there was deference to an unknown nature that explained the superficial properties by means of which we usually recognise instances of the liquid. On this view, it was (in 1700) an epistemological possibility that water was not H2O, but it was not a metaphysical possibility, given that water is in fact H2O. Along similar lines, it can be argued that it is only an epistemological and not a genuine metaphysical possibility that Swampman might have intentionality. Note that this last claim is not the claim that it is merely an epistemological possibility that Swampman might exist. Rather, the crucial claim is that, even if he did exist, it would remain a mere epistemological possibility that he would have genuine intentionality. This parallels the claim regarding water and XYZ. Even if XYZ were to exist on Twin-Earth and Twin-Earth were in our universe, it would not be water. Superficial appearances would be on the side of Swampman's having intentionality, just as they would be on the side of XYZ's being water, but it may turn out that Swampman's “intentionality” is not intentionality, just as it would turn out that XYZ is not water (it is just twin-water). Intuitions about Swampman, it is claimed, cannot decide the issue of what the correct analysis of intentionality is. Rather, the decision about Swampman's intentionality should be driven by the theory of content that best accounts for the real kind.  That in turn should be driven by other considerations, such as which theory delivers correct content ascriptions for us and other existing creatures. Of course, in the case of intentionality, unlike the case of water, the hidden nature or essence cannot be an inner structure, if a teleological theory is correct. On such a theory, intentionality is alleged to be an historical kind, so the previously hidden nature is alleged to be a matter of history. As proponents of teleological theories point out, there is an apparent need for other historical kinds in biology (e.g., offspring, homologs and species). (Braddon-Mitchell and Jackson (1997) have argued that this “real nature” response is not available to proponents of teleological theories of content.  See Papineau 2001 for a response.) The Methodological Individualism debate is also relevant here, since it questions whether science should have any historical kinds. If those who favor methodological invidualism are correct, teleological theories of content do not provide us with a good scientific way to individuate psychological states (Fodor 1991). One argument for methodological individualism involves the claim that science should individuate kinds on the basis of causal powers. In brief, the idea is that, since science is in the business of causal explanations and causal powers are what are relevant for causal explanations, science should classify items on the basis of similarities and differences in causal powers. Since there are no differences in causal powers between Davidson's kidney or beliefs at t and Swampman's kidney-analog and belief-analogs when he first pops into existence, Davidson's kidney and Swampman's kidney-analog should belong to all of the same scientific kind and Davidson's beliefs and Swampman's belief-analogs should belong to all of the same scientific kinds. (For discussion of this issue, see Heil & Mele eds. 1993.) One problem with methodological individualism is that it is radically revisionary, for biology at least. Moreover, if we classify kidneys on the basis of actual causal powers, we include Swampman's kidney-analog at the cost of excluding many real kidneys, such as the kidneys of people on dialysis. While the arguments given in favor of methodological individualism may seem plausible, they are not usually accompanied by any attempt to understand the role that historical classifications play in biology or elsewhere. That being the case, we have reason to worry that the understanding of scientific classification that supports methodological individualism is too simple. Further, it must be kept in mind that the proponents of teleological theories claim that a historical theory of content is needed to capture psycho-semantic norms. Perhaps this is wrong. But if it is right, and if cognitive science needs such a normative notion, then methodological individualism must be wrong. Thus the debate must turn on the more specific issues of whether normative content involves history and whether cognitive science needs normative content. The weightiest objection to teleological theories of content and the hardest to assess is that it is unclear how such theories could explain our most sophisticated concepts and cognitive capacities. No naturalistic theory of content at this time yet makes perfectly clear how we think about democracy, virtue, quarks or perhaps even tomorrow, and so this is not a problem that is peculiar to teleo-functional theories.  However, it is sometimes argued that teleological theories of content have a special problem in this respect (e.g., Peacocke (1992)). The thought is that they may have some hope of working for contents that concern things that impact on fitness — food, shelter, mates, etc. — but that they are, in principle, unable to deal with contents that cannot have impacted on fitness, or not in any suitably selective way. Some contents cannot have impacted on fitness because they belong to the future or are non-existent. Others cannot affect fitness in any suitably selective way because, although they have an impact, their impact is too non-specific: for example, quarks have an impact but because they are omnipresent in our environment they cannot qualify as the content of a representation by virtue of some simple selectional story. This objection is hard to assess for a number of reasons. One is that there are many different kinds of sophisticated concepts and capacities and accounting for them all is a large task. Another is that, while the objection is posed as an objection to all teleosemantic theories, different versions will address it in different ways. Yet another is that we might allow that it is still early days with respect to the development of teleological (and other) naturalistic theories of mental content. It has really only been since the advent of cognitive science in the middle of the last century and the general acceptance of a broadly physicalist perspective on the mind in the decades that followed that philosophers of mind have devoted much effort to trying to give a naturalistic theory of mental content. In view of all of this, the present section can do little more than offer a few remarks about how some versions of teleosemantics make some inroads on the issue. Most of the points that follow have been touched on in earlier sections. It should be emphasized that those who favor teleosemantic theories rarely restrict the relevant functions to those that derive from natural selection operating over an evolutionary span of time.  As remarked earlier, there might be non-intentional selection processes that operate over the span of a culture or over the span of an individual's own development or life.  Meme selection, conditioning or some other forms of learning and neural selection are considered to be relevant kinds of selection by some proponents of teleosemantics. Those who favor modest teleo-functional theories would also emphasize that conceptual atomism is highly controversial.  Conceptual atomism is the view that every concept of roughly the grain of a lexeme of a natural language derives its content, constitutively speaking, independently of every other such concept's content. Many psychologists and some philosophers believe that some complex concepts are somehow composed out of or are anyway learned through the use of simpler concepts.  Crucially, to deny that conceptual atomism is true does not commit one to the view that complex concepts are simply defined in terms of simpler concepts (a fuller discussion of concepts and whether conceptions can play any role in determining reference is outside of the scope of this entry). Millikan would in this context ask us to take note of her notions of derived and adapted proper functions. What Millikan refers to as a “direct proper function” belongs to a mechanism for which there has been selection. The mechanisms that produce camouflage patterns on the surface of the octopus have the direct proper function to do so.  The patterns that the mechanisms produce by means of which they perform this function possess what Millikan calls a “derived proper function,” derived from the function of the mechanism to provide camouflage.  Further, a pattern produced on a particular occasion has an “adapted derived proper function,” which is a relational function, in this case to provide camouflage in that particular setting in which the octopus is situated. Millikan makes use of these extended senses in which items may have functions to try to explain the contents of novel representations and representations that are produced as a result of learning. Learning mechanisms have certain functions and when they perform their functions in particular circumstances their products can have adapted derived proper functions in relation to those circumstances, whether or not the circumstances obtained during the history of our species. Millikan (2000) gives an extensive treatment of concepts. In brief, her view is that conceptions play no role in determining the extensions of the concepts with which they are associated. Millikan's theory presupposes innate learning mechanisms that are tuned to identify substances of different sorts in accord with certain principles. The relevant sort of substance is that which accounts for the past selective success of the learning mechanisms. For instance, some mental mechanisms might have been selected for recognizing faces of individuals in accord with certain principles of operation, and others might have been selected for recognizing animals of different species in accord with other principles of operation. These mechanisms can acquire the “purpose” to recognize something more specific, such as a particular individual's face or animals of a particular species, because the mechanisms were selected for recognizing things in that domain (faces or animals) in accord with certain principles of operation and, in accord with those principles, it is a particular individual's face or animals of a particular species that it now has the “purpose” to recognize. The extension of a substance concept, she tells us, is what substance it was selected to recognize. Large issues relevant to assessing the different teleological theories of content remain to be settled. On a hopeful note, much good work has been done in exploring the possible range of such theories, in producing interesting in-principle objections and in responding to such objections in ways that have resulted in better developed or better defended versions.  We should also keep in mind that serious work on naturalistic theories of content has only been going on for decades rather than centuries and that, on a philosophical timescale, that is quite a short time.