 RTT concerns propositional attitudes and the mental processes in which they figure, such as deductive inference, reasoning, decision-making, and planning. It does not address perception, motor control, imagination, dreaming, pattern recognition, linguistic processing, or any other mental activity distinct from high-level cognition. Hence the emphasis upon a language of thought: a system of mental representations that underlie thinking, as opposed to perceiving, imagining, etc. Nevertheless, talk about a mental language generalizes naturally from high-level cognition to other mental phenomena. Perception is a good example. The perceptual system transforms proximal sensory stimulations (e.g., retinal stimulations) into perceptual estimates of environmental conditions (e.g., estimates of shapes, sizes, colors, locations, etc.). Helmholtz (1867 [1925]) proposed that the transition from proximal sensory input to perceptual estimates features an unconscious inference, similar in key respects to high-level conscious inference yet inaccessible to consciousness. Helmholtz’s proposal is foundational to contemporary perceptual psychology, which constructs detailed mathematical models of unconscious perceptual inference (Knill & Richards 1996; Rescorla 2015). Fodor (1975: 44–55) argues that this scientific research program presupposes mental representations. The representations participate in unconscious inferences or inference-like transitions executed by the perceptual  system.[5] Navigation is another good example. Tolman (1948) hypothesized that rats navigate using cognitive maps: mental representations that represent the layout of the spatial environment. The cognitive map hypothesis, advanced during the heyday of behaviorism, initially encountered great scorn. It remained a fringe position well into the 1970s, long after the demise of behaviorism. Eventually, mounting behavioral and neurophysiological evidence won it many converts (Gallistel 1990; Gallistel & Matzel 2013; Jacobs & Menzel 2014; O’Keefe & Nadel 1978; Weiner et al. 2011). Although a few researchers remain skeptical (Mackintosh 20002), there is now a broad consensus that mammals (and possibly even some insects) navigate using mental representations of spatial layout. Rescorla (2017b) summarizes the case for cognitive maps and reviews some of their core properties. To what extent should we expect perceptual representations and cognitive maps to resemble the mental representations that figure in high-level human thought? It is generally agreed that all these mental representations have compositional structure. For example, the perceptual system can bind together a representation of shape and a representation of size to form a complex representation that an object has a certain shape and size; the representational import of the complex representation depends in a systematic way upon the representational import of the component representations. On the other hand, it is not clear that perceptual representations have anything resembling logical structure, including even predicative structure (Burge 2010: 540–544; Fodor 2008: 169–195). Nor is it evident that cognitive maps contain logical connectives or predicates (Rescorla 2009a, 2009b). Perceptual processing and non-human navigation certainly do not seem to instantiate mental processes that would exploit putative logical structure. In particular, they do not seem to instantiate deductive inference. These observations provide ammunition for pluralism about representational format. Pluralists can posit one system of compositionally structured mental representations for perception, another for navigation, another for high-level cognition, and so on. Different representational systems potentially feature different compositional mechanisms. As indicated in  section 1.3,  pluralism figures prominently in contemporary cognitive science. Pluralists face some pressing questions. Which compositional mechanisms figure in which psychological domains? Which representational formats support which mental operations? How do different representational formats interface with each other? Further research bridging philosophy and cognitive science is needed to address such questions.