 In June 1899, at a ceremony marking the installation of the new Gauss-Weber monument in Göttingen, David Hilbert delivered a lecture on the foundations of geometry. Published later that year by Teubner under the title “Grundlagen der Geometrie” (“Foundations of Geometry”), the piece stands as a watershed in the development of modern mathematics and logic. Though the subject-matter of the work is geometry, its lasting influence concerns more broadly the role of axioms in mathematical theories, and the systematic treatment of such metatheoretical questions as consistency and independence. By presenting a rich trove of consistency and independence demonstrations, Hilbert displays here the power of the “formal” approach to axioms, and lays the groundwork for what soon becomes our own contemporary model-theoretic approach to formal systems. (For the historical background to Hilbert’s treatment of axioms, see Hallett 2012 and  Nineteenth Century Geometry;  for the role of Hilbert’s work in the development of model theory, see  model theory  and Eder & Schiemer 2018.) Hilbert’s lecture and monograph inspired a sharp reaction from his contemporary Gottlob Frege, who found both Hilbert’s understanding of axioms, and his approach to consistency and independence demonstrations, virtually incomprehensible and at any rate seriously flawed. Frege’s reaction is first laid out in his correspondence with Hilbert from December 1899 to September 1900, and subsequently in two series of essays (both entitled “On the Foundations of Geometry”) published in 1903 and 1906. Hilbert was never moved by Frege’s criticisms, and did not respond to them after 1900. Frege, for his part, was never convinced of the reliability of Hilbert’s methods, and held until the end that the latter’s consistency and independence proofs were fatally  flawed.[1] In this philosophical debate between the two mathematicians, we see a clash between two quite different ways of understanding the nature of mathematical theories and of their justification. The difference of opinion over the success of Hilbert’s consistency and independence proofs is, as detailed below, the result of significant differences of opinion over such fundamental issues as: how to understand the content of a mathematical theory, what a successful axiomatization consists in, what the “truths” of a mathematical theory really are, and finally, what one is really asking when one asks about the consistency of a set of axioms or the independence of a given mathematical statement from others. In what follows, we look briefly at Hilbert’s technique in Foundations of Geometry, detail Frege’s various criticisms thereof, and finally outline the overall conceptions of logic that give rise to the differences.