 Hilbert’s work in Foundations of Geometry (hereafter referred to as “FG”) consists primarily of laying out a clear and precise set of axioms for Euclidean geometry, and of demonstrating in detail the relations of those axioms to one another and to some of the fundamental theorems of geometry. In particular, Hilbert demonstrates the consistency of various sub-groups of the axioms, the independence of a number of axioms from others, and various relations of provability and of independence of important theorems from specific sub-groups of the axioms. Included are new demonstrations of the consistency of the entire set of axioms for Euclidean geometry, and of the independence of the axiom of parallels from the other Euclidean axioms. The notion of “independence” at issue here is that of non-provability: to say that a given statement is independent of a collection of statements is to say that it is not provable from them, or equivalently that the collection does not logically entail that statement. Consistency, too, is understood in terms of provability: to say that a collection of statements is consistent is to say that no contradiction is provable from it. Hence the two notions, consistency and independence, are inter-definable: a set of statements is consistent if an arbitrarily-chosen contradiction is independent of it, and a statement S is independent of a set C if the set \(C \cup {\sim}S\) is consistent. Hilbert’s consistency demonstrations in FG are all demonstrations of relative consistency, which is to say that in each case the consistency of a set AX of geometric axioms is reduced to that of a familiar background theory B, demonstrating that AX is consistent if B is. The important technique Hilbert employs is the reinterpretation of the geometric terms appearing in AX in such a way that, as reinterpreted, the members of AX express theorems of B. For example, Hilbert’s first consistency-proof interprets the terms “point”, “line”, and “lies on” as standing respectively for a particular collection of ordered pairs of real numbers, for a collection of ratios of real numbers, and for an algebraically-defined relation between such pairs and ratios; under this reinterpretation, the geometric sentences in question express theorems of the background theory of real numbers. That such a reinterpretation strategy guarantees relative consistency can be seen via the following reasoning: If the set AX were inconsistent, then it would logically imply a contradiction. But as logical implication is independent of the specific meanings of such terms as “point” and “line”, AX would continue to imply a contradiction under its reinterpretation. But that is just to say that a set of theorems of B would imply a contradiction, hence that B itself would be inconsistent. Independence is demonstrated in exactly the same way. To show that a statement I is independent of a set AX of statements (relative to the consistency of B), one interprets the relevant geometric terms in such a way that the members of AX, as interpreted, express theorems of B, while I expresses the negation of a theorem of B. That is, the independence of I from AX (relative to the consistency of B) is demonstrated by proving the consistency of \(\textit{AX} \cup \{{\sim}I\}\) relative to that of B. The general idea of using interpretation to prove consistency was not novel in FG; similar strategies had been recently applied in various mathematical schools to show consistency and independence in arithmetic and in class theory, as well as  geometry.[2]  The technique also has antecedents in the earlier use of geometric models to prove the consistency of non-Euclidean geometries.  [3]  Hilbert’s work in FG brings however a significant advance in terms of the clarity and systematic application of the technique, and an influential account of the nature of the metatheoretic reasoning involved in demonstrating consistency and independence via reinterpretation. Once Hilbert’s technique is applied to the sentences of a fully formalized language, a development that took place in stages over the three decades following FG, we obtain essentially the modern understanding of models, whose use today in demonstrations of consistency and independence differs only in detail from that of Hilbert’s  technique.[4] Hilbert’s central idea, again, is to focus not on particular geometrical concepts like point and line, but to pay attention instead to the logical relations that are said, by the axioms, to hold between those concepts. The question of the independence of the parallels axiom from the other Euclidean axioms has entirely to do with the logical structure exhibited by these axioms, and nothing to do with whether it is geometric points and lines one is talking about, or some other subject-matter altogether. As Hilbert says, [I]t is surely obvious that every theory is only a scaffolding or schema of concepts together with their necessary relations to one another, and that the basic elements can be thought of in any way one likes. If in speaking of my points I think of some system of things, e.g., the system: love, law, chimney-sweep … and then assume all my axioms as relations between these things, then my propositions, e.g., Pythagoras’ theorem, are also valid for these things. In other words: any theory can always be applied to infinitely many systems of basic elements. (Letter to Frege of December 29, 1899, as excerpted by Frege [ellipsis Hilbert’s or Frege’s] in Frege 1980: 40) This understanding of the geometric terms as susceptible of multiple interpretations enables one to see the geometric sentences themselves, and sets of them, as providing definitions of a certain kind, a kind typically referred to as “implicit definition”. Specifically: A set AX of sentences containing n reinterpretable terms implicitly defines an n-place relation \(R_{\textit{AX}}\) holding of just those n-tuples which, when taken respectively as the interpretations of AX’s reinterpretable terms, render the members of AX true. (For example: if AX is the set {There are at least two points; Every point lies on at least two lines}, then \(R_{\textit{AX}}\) is the relation that holds of any triple \(\langle P, \textit{LO}, L\rangle\) such that P has at least two members, L has at least two members, and LO is a relation that holds between each member of P and at least two members of L.) The defined relation is simply the abstract structure, or as Hilbert puts it the “scaffolding”, shared by any such  n-tuple.[5] When a set of sentences provides an implicit definition of a relation, one can ask whether that relation (and, by extension, the set of sentences itself) is satisfiable. That is, one can ask whether there is an n-tuple which, when serving as the interpretation of the relevant terms in the sentences, will make each sentence true. Each of Hilbert’s consistency-demonstrations in FG provides an n-tuple that satisfies the relevant defined relation, and hence provides a proof of the satisfiability of that relation. Satisfiability in this sense is sufficient for consistency, via the reasoning given  above.[6] We can now redescribe Hilbert’s technique, in a nutshell, as follows: Given a set AX of sentences, Hilbert appeals to a background theory B to construct an interpretation of AX’s geometric terms under which the members of AX express theorems of B. This interpretation is, assuming the consistency of B, an n-tuple satisfying the relation \(R_{\textit{AX}}\) defined by AX. Its existence demonstrates the satisfiability of \(R_{\textit{AX}}\) and consequently the consistency of AX relative to that of B. Similarly for the independence of I from AX.