 LOTH has elicited too many objections to cover in a single encyclopedia entry. We will discuss two objections, both alleging that LOTH generates a vicious regress. The first objection emphasizes language learning. The second emphasizes language understanding. Like many cognitive scientists, Fodor holds that children learn a natural language via hypothesis formation and testing. Children formulate, test, and confirm hypotheses about the denotations of words. For example, a child learning English will confirm the hypothesis that “cat” denotes cats. According to Fodor, denotations are represented in Mentalese. To formulate the hypothesis that “cat” denotes cats, the child uses a Mentalese word cat that denotes cats. It may seem that a regress is now in the offing, sparked by the question: How does the child learn Mentalese? Suppose we extend the hypothesis formation and testing model (henceforth HF) to Mentalese. Then we must posit a meta-language to express hypotheses about denotations of Mentalese words, a meta-meta-language to express hypotheses about denotations of meta-language words, and so on ad infinitum (Atherton and Schwartz 1974: 163). Fodor responds to the threatened regress by denying we should apply HF to Mentalese (1975: 65). Children do not test hypotheses about the denotations of Mentalese words. They do not learn Mentalese at all. The mental language is innate. The doctrine that some concepts are innate was a focal point in the clash between rationalism versus empiricism. Rationalists defended the innateness of certain fundamental ideas, such as god and cause, while empiricists held that all ideas derive from sensory experience. A major theme in the 1960s cognitive science revolution was revival of a nativist picture, inspired by the rationalists, on which many key elements of cognition are innate. Most famously, Chomsky (1965) explained language acquisition by positing innate knowledge about possible human languages. Fodor’s innateness thesis was widely perceived as going way beyond all precedent, verging on the preposterous (P.S. Churchland 1986; Putnam 1988). How could we have an innate ability to represent all the denotations we mentally represent? For example, how could we innately possess a Mentalese word carburetor that represents carburetors? In evaluating these issues, it is vital to distinguish between learning a concept versus acquiring a concept. When Fodor says that a concept is innate, he does not mean to deny that we acquire the concept or even that certain kinds of experience are needed to acquire it. Fodor fully grants that we cannot mentally represent carburetors at birth and that we come to represent them only by undergoing appropriate experiences. He agrees that most concepts are acquired. He denies that they are learned. In effect, he uses “innate” as a synonym for “unlearned” (1975: 96). One might reasonably challenge Fodor’s usage. One might resist classifying a concept as innate simply because it is unlearned. However, that is how Fodor uses the word “innate”. Properly understood, then, Fodor’s position is not as far-fetched as it may  sound.[7] Fodor gives a simple but striking argument that concepts are unlearned. The argument begins from the premise that HF is the only potentially viable model of concept learning. Fodor then argues that HF is not a viable model of concept learning, from which he concludes that concepts are unlearned. He offers various formulations and refinements of the argument over his career. Here is a relatively recent rendition (2008: 139): Now, according to HF, the process by which one learns C must include the inductive evaluation of some such hypothesis as “The C things are the ones that are green or triangular”. But the inductive evaluation of that hypothesis itself requires (inter alia) bringing the property green or triangular before the mind as such… Quite generally, you can’t represent anything as such and such unless you already have the concept such and such. All that being so, it follows, on pain of circularity, that “concept learning” as HF understands it can’t be a way of acquiring concept C… Conclusion: If concept learning is as HF understands it, there can be no such thing. This conclusion is entirely general; it doesn’t matter whether the target concept is primitive (like green) or complex (like green or triangular). Fodor’s argument does not presuppose RTT, COMP, or CTM. To the extent that the argument works, it applies to any view on which people have concepts. If concepts are not learned, then how are they acquired? Fodor offers some preliminary remarks (2008: 144–168), but by his own admission the remarks are sketchy and leave numerous questions unanswered (2008: 144–145). Prinz (2011) critiques Fodor’s positive treatment of concept acquisition. The most common rejoinder to Fodor’s innateness argument is to deny that HF is the only viable model of concept learning. The rejoinder acknowledges that concepts are not learned through hypothesis testing but insists they are learned through other means. Three examples: A lot depends here upon what counts as “learning” and what does not, a question that seems difficult to adjudicate. A closely connected question is whether concept acquisition is a rational process or a mere causal process. To the extent that acquiring some concept is a rational achievement, we will want to say that one learned the concept. To the extent that acquiring the concept is a mere causal process (more like catching a cold than confirming a hypothesis), we will feel less inclined to say that genuine learning took place (Fodor 1981: 275). These issues lie at the frontier of psychological and philosophical research. The key point for present purposes is that there are two options for halting the regress of language learning: we can say that thinkers acquire concepts but do not learn them; or we can say that thinkers learn concepts through some means other than hypothesis testing. Of course, it is not enough just to note that the two options exist. Ultimately, one must develop one’s favored option into a compelling theory. But there is no reason to think that doing so would reinitiate the regress. In any event, explaining concept acquisition is an important task facing any theorist who accepts that we have concepts, whether or not the theorist accepts LOTH. Thus, the learning regress objection is best regarded not as posing a challenge specific to LOTH but rather as highlighting a more widely shared theoretical obligation: the obligation to explain how we acquire concepts. For further discussion, see the entry on innateness. See also the exchange between Cowie (1999) and Fodor (2001). What is it to understand a natural language word? On a popular picture, understanding a word requires that you mentally represent the word’s denotation. For example, understanding the word “cat” requires representing that it denotes cats. LOT theorists will say that you use Mentalese words to represent denotations. The question now arises what it is to understand a Mentalese word. If understanding the Mentalese word requires representing that it has a certain denotation, then we face an infinite regress of meta-languages (Blackburn 1984: 43–44). The standard response is to deny that ordinary thinkers represent Mentalese words as having denotations (Bach 1987; Fodor 1975: 66–79). Mentalese is not an instrument of communication. Thinking is not “talking to oneself” in Mentalese. A typical thinker does not represent, perceive, interpret, or reflect upon Mentalese expressions. Mentalese serves as a medium within which her thought occurs, not an object of interpretation. We should not say that she “understands” Mentalese in the same way that she understands a natural language. There is perhaps another sense in which the thinker “understands” Mentalese: her mental activity coheres with the meanings of Mentalese words. For example, her deductive reasoning coheres with the truth-tables expressed by Mentalese logical connectives. More generally, her mental activity is semantically coherent. To say that the thinker “understands” Mentalese in this sense is not to say that she represents Mentalese denotations. Nor is there any evident reason to suspect that explaining semantic coherence will ultimately require us to posit mental representation of Mentalese denotations. So there is no regress of understanding. For further criticism of this regress argument, see the discussions of Knowles (1998) and Laurence and Margolis  (1997).[8]