 It is commonly said that, according to the deflationary theory, truth is not a property and therefore that, according to the theory, if a  proposition is true, it is mistaken to say that the proposition has a property, the property of being true. There is something right and  something wrong about this view, and to see what is wrong and right  about it will help us to understand the deflationary theory. Consider the two true propositions (5) and (6): (6) The earth revolves around the sun. Do these propositions share a property of being true? Well, in one  sense of course they do: since they are both true, we can say that  there both have the property of being true. In this sense, the  deflationary theory is not denying that truth is a property: truth is the property that all true propositions have. On the other hand, when we say that two things share a property  F, we often mean more than simply that they are both  F; we mean in addition that there is intuitively a common  explanation as to why they are both F. It is in this second  sense in which deflationists are denying that truth is a property.  Thus, in the case of our example, what explains the truth of (5) is  that Caracas is the capital of Venezuela; and what explains this is  the political history of Venezuela. On the other hand, what explains  the truth of (6) is that the earth revolves around the sun; and what  explains this is the nature of the solar system. The nature of the  solar system, however, has nothing to do with the political history  of Venezuela (or if it does the connections are completely  accidental!) and to that extent there is no shared explanation as to  why (5) and (6) are both true. Therefore, in this stronger sense,  they have no property in common. It will help to bring out the contrast being invoked here if we  consider two properties that have nothing to do with truth, the  property of being, i.e. the property of having existence, and the  property of being a mammal. Consider Hillary Rodham Clinton and the  Great Wall of China. Do these objects have the property of existence? Well, in one sense, they do: they both exist so they both have the  property of existence. On the other hand, however, there is no common explanation as to why they both exist. What explains the existence of the Great Wall is the architectural and defense policies of classical China; what explains the existence of Hillary Rodham Clinton is Mr  and Mrs Rodham. We might then say that existence is not a property  and mean by this that it does not follow from the fact that two  things exist that there is a common explanation as to why they exist. But now compare the property of existence with the property of being  a mammal. If two things are mammals, they have the property of being  a mammal, but in addition there is some common explanation as to why  they are both mammals — both are descended from the same family of creatures, say. According to deflationism, the property of being  true is more like the property of existence than it is like the  property of being a mammal. Depending on one's views about what it takes to be a property, then,  one might be tempted to say here that being true is not a property,  because it is not like being a mammal. But in fact most contemporary  deflationists, pursuing the analogy between truth and existence,  describe truth as a logical property (for example, Field 1992: 322;  Horwich 1998a: 37; Künne 2003: 91).