 What is the motivation for adopting a theory of truth-makers, whether maximalist or optimalist? Following Sider, it has become customary to describe the “whole point” of adopting a theory of truth-makers thus: to “Catch the cheaters” who don’t believe in truth-makers (Sider 2001: 40–1; see also Merricks 2007: 2–3). But this is a bit like saying that the point of a benefit system is to catch out benefit frauds. It’s only if there is some antecedent point in favour of truth-makers that there can be anything wrong with leaving them out. Nonetheless, it is possible that we can come to appreciate the need for truth-makers by appreciating what is lacking in theories that neglect them. This is how C.B. Martin and Armstrong came to recognise the necessity for admitting truth-makers (Armstrong 1989b: 8–11, 2004: 1–3). Consider phenomenalism: the view that the physical world is a construction out of sense-impressions. One obstacle for this view is the need to make sense in sense-impression terms of true claims we make about the unobserved world. Martin noticed that the phenomenalist could only appeal to brute, ungrounded counterfactuals about possible experience to do so. But counterfactuals do not float free in a void. They must be responsive to an underlying reality, the reality that makes them true. For Martin this was the phenomenalists’ fatal error: their inability to supply credible truth-makers for truths about unobserved objects. The same error afflicted Ryle’s behaviourism with its brute counterfactuals about non-existent behaviour and Prior’s presentism according to which there is nothing outside the present and so there is nothing for past-tensed and future-tensed truths to be held responsible to. We come to appreciate the need for truth-makers as the common need these different theories fail to fulfil. As Lewis points out, this demand for truth-makers represented an overreaction to what was undoubtedly a flaw in phenomenalism (1992: 217). We can already understand what’s wrong with phenomenalism when we appreciate that it fails to provide an account of the things upon which the truth of counterfactuals about sense impressions supervene, i.e., when we see that it fails to satisfy (Subject Matter). This leaves under-motivated the claim that phenomenalism should also be faulted for failing to supply truth-makers to ground counterfactuals about sense-impressions. The same reasoning applies to behaviourism and presentism; they also fail to satisfy (Subject Matter). So there’s no need to adopt truth makers to catch cheats. All we need to do is to recognise the strictures (Subject Matter) places upon us. It’s a further flaw of Martin and Armstrong’s reasoning that even if we accede to the demand for truth-makers it doesn’t follow that even idealism is ruled out. According to Armstrong if we forsake the demand for truth-makers we thereby challenge “the realistic insight that there is a world that exists independently of our thoughts and statements, making the latter true or false” (1997: 128). But even an idealist could accept that there are truth-makers whilst thinking of them as mind-dependent entities. So acceding to the demand for truth-makers doesn’t tell us what’s wrong with idealism (Daly 2005: 95–7). Bergmann, the grandfather of the contemporary truth-maker movement, was explicit about this: “the truth of S must be grounded ontologically. On this first move idealists and realists agree” (Bergmann 1961: 229). The realist-idealist distinction cuts across the distinction between philosophers who admit truth-makers and those that don’t (Dodd 2002: 83–4). The demand for truth-makers doesn’t help “catch cheaters” at all. Just acknowledge, e.g., some brute counterfactual facts about sense data, or brute dispositions to behave in one way or another, or brute facts about what happened in the past or will happen in the future. What’s unsatisfactory about these posits isn’t that if they existed they’d fail to make true statements about unobserved objects or statements about mental states that failed to manifest themselves in actual behaviour or statements about the past or future. The problem is that we have difficulty in understanding how such facts or dispositions could be explanatorily sound (Horwich 2009: 195–7). Whatever we find lacking in theories that posit such items, it isn’t that they fail to provide truth-makers, because they do. Of course if we are already committed to the need for truth makers then we will likely conceive of the demand for them as, e.g., drawing the phenomenalist out into the open to reveal the unfitness of their explanatory posits. But unless we already have independent reasons for recognising the demand for truth makers, catching cheaters cannot provide a motivation for positing them. Does this mean that we should join Bigelow in his retreat to (Truth Supervenes Upon Being) or step back with Lewis to (Subject Matter)? The problem is that these supervenience principles don’t seem a satisfactory resting place either, not if our concern is to understand how true representations can touch upon an independent reality, i.e., something non-representational. First, it is familiar point that just appealing to a systematic pattern of modal co-variation between truths and their subject matters—so that there is no difference in the former without a difference in the latter—doesn’t provide us within any insight into the underlying mechanism or mechanisms that sustains this dependency (Molnar 2000: 82–3; Heil 2003: 67; Daly 2005: 97–8; Melia 2005: 82–3). Second, if possible worlds are conceived as maximal representations then these supervenience principles (understood in the idiom of possible worlds) fail to articulate what it is for a representation to touch upon being, something non-representational: “For the idea that every truth depends on being is not the idea that every truth is entailed by propositions of a certain sort” (Merricks 2007: 86). A third reason for being unsatisfied with Lewis’ (Subject Matter) is based upon the observation that the supervenience involved is symmetric. Just as there is no difference in the distribution of truth-values amongst the body of propositions without a reciprocating difference in their subject matter, there is no difference in their subject matter without a difference in the distribution of their truth-values (Armstrong 2004: 7–8). But we also have the firm intuition that the truth or falsity of a proposition depends upon the state of the world in a way in which the state of the world doesn’t depend upon the proposition’s truth or falsity. This means that a supervenience principle like (Subject Matter) cannot be used to articulate the asymmetric way in which truth so depends upon being; for this, it is argued, we need to rely upon a robust asymmetric notion of truth-making (Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005: 18–19). Bricker (2015: 180–183) replies on Lewis’s behalf that the oft-heard complaint that supervenience by itself is not a dependence or ontological priority relation is besides the point. Rather, Bricker argues, the metaphysical punch of Lewis’s doctrine that truth supervenes upon being “has little to do with the ‘supervenience part’ and everything to do with the ‘being’ part and the conception of fundamentality that informs it”, where by ‘fundamental’ Bricker means Lewis’s theory of natural properties and relations. But is there really anything so problematic or mysterious about the asymmetric dependence of truth upon being that we need anything as heavy duty as truth-making or supervenience+naturalness to explain it? A number of proposals have been made for explaining the felt asymmetry in other terms. Horwich (1998: 105; 2008: 265–66) argues that asymmetric dependence of truth upon being arises from the fact that we can deduce p from the proposition that p is true. But we can equally deduce p from p is true so this fails to establish an asymmetric dependence (Künne 2003: 151–52; Rodriguez-Pereyra 2005: 27). Hornsby argues instead that there is explanatory asymmetry between its being the case that p and the proposition that p is true, because the latter requires more to be the case than the former, (e.g.) that there are propositions (Hornsby 2005: 44). Dodd suggests a cognate alternative: that the felt asymmetry of truth upon being arises from the fact that the identity of the proposition that p is partially determined by the worldly items it’s about, so we can’t understand what is required for the proposition that p to be true without already having an understanding of what it is for p to be the case (Dodd 2007: 398–400). MacBride (2014) offers a purely semantic account of the felt asymmetry in terms of the interlocking mechanism of reference and satisfaction that explains the truth of a proposition. Whilst we can deduce from the truth of the proposition that p that p is the case, MacBride argues that we can’t (ultimately) explain its being the case that p in terms of the truth of the proposition that p because its being the case that p is already assumed by the truth of that proposition, that is, has already performed a role in the semantic mechanism whereby the truth-value is determined. By contrast, MacBride continues, its being the case that p isn’t determined by a semantic mechanism but by whatever worldly factors, if any, that gave rise to p’s being the case. Saenz (2018) replies that whilst reference and satisfaction may be used to explain that propositions are true, they still “do not, in any sense, account for the world ‘making it’ [sic] that propositions are some way” (a similar point is made by Mulligan et al 1984: 288, see sec. 3.5 below for further discussion). But Saenz risks begging the question by making the additional demand on the character of the felt asymmetry of truth and being that it consists in more than an asymmetric relationship between truth and being. Saenz holds that the felt asymmetry consists in the requirement that the world makes propositions true but whether we need to appeal to the idea of the world making propositions true in the first place is the point at issue. Finally, Liggins (2012) argues that the felt asymmetry between truth and being is best explained in terms of the asymmetry of grounding, although, as we have seen, the asymmetry of grounding is contested (see sec. 1.6 above for further discussion). “Catching cheats” doesn’t supply a motivation for adopting truth-makers. Are there other motivations for so doing? One such motivation is that truth-making falls out naturally from the correspondence theory of truth. Anybody who is attracted to the correspondence theory of truth should be drawn to the truth-maker [sic]. Correspondence demands a correspondent, and a correspondent for a truth is a truth-maker. (Armstrong 1997: 14; see also 1997: 128–9, 2004: 16–7) According to Armstrong, the “truth-maker principle” (aka maximalism) just is what we are left with once we drop the assumption from the correspondence theory that the relation between truth bearers and truth-makers is one-one. Of course, the truth-making relation, however it is explicated, cannot be the relation of correspondence in terms of which truth is defined—for whereas the latter is symmetric, the former isn’t (Beebee & Dodd 2005b: 13–4). But this doesn’t prevent truth being defined using the truth-making relation, albeit in a more roundabout way according to the following pattern, Of course such a definition will only succeed if the relation expressed by “is-made-true-by” can itself be explicated without relying upon the notion of truth itself or other notions that implicitly presuppose it, e.g., entailment (Merricks 2007: 15). This is no doubt one of the reasons that principles of truth-making are typically not put forward as definitions of truth (David 2009: 144). Another objection made by Horwich is that it is implausible to suppose that an ordinary person understands the notion of truth via the heterogeneous principles that govern the provision of truth-makers for different types of propositions. It’s more plausible to suppose that we first grasp what truth is, and only subsequently figure out what truth-makers are required for the various kinds of propositions there are (Horwich 2009: 188). Several philosophers have argued that so far from presupposing the notion of truth, the various truth-making principles we have discussed operate at a far more subterranean level. Bigelow writes, “The force behind Truth-maker lies deeper than worries about the nature of truth and of truth-bearers” (Bigelow 1988: 127, 2009: 396–7; Robinson 2000: 152; Lewis 2001: 605–6; Horwich 2009: 188–9, Bricker 2015: 169). Suppose we understand what it is to be truth-maker in terms of entailment. Then whatever the range of truths we think are capable of being rendered true, the “guts” of our truth-maker principle can be stated using the schema, This schema is equivalent to the infinitely many conditionals that fall under it: Note that neither “true” nor “truth” shows up anywhere in the schema or its instances. Arguably the only role that the notion of truth performs is the one that minimalist or deflationary theories of truth emphasize, that of enabling us to capture all of that unending string of conditionals in a single slogan, But since truth is serving here only as a device of generalization, the real subject matter of (Slogan) is already expressed by the conditionals (i1), (i2) etc. Since they make no explicit mention of either propositions or truth, a theory of truth-makers is neither a theory about propositions nor a theory about truth. If so, then the theory of truth-makers can neither gain inspiration from, nor be tarred by the same brush as the correspondence theory of truth. Nor need the theory of truth-makers be bedeviled by concerns about the nature of truth bearers. One may nevertheless wonder whether Bigelow and Lewis have thrown the baby out with the bathwater. MacBride (2013a) argues that if we do not allow ourselves the general thought that truth-bearers are true or false depending upon how things stand in the world then it is unclear what, if any, credibility (i1), (i2) etc. have. For why should there be something in the world whose existence necessitates that (e.g.) cats purr? Why can’t cats purr, even though there is nothing whose existence entails that truth? Since Slogan is intended to be just shorthand for its instances, (i 1), (i 2) etc. it follows Slogan can’t be any more credible or motivated than its instances. If, however, we allow ourselves a conception of truth which isn’t deflationary, i.e. a substantial conception whereby truth is conceived as a relation borne by a truth-bearer to something worldly that exists independently of us, then, MacBride argues, we will have an independent reason for positing something worldly the existence of which necessitates the truth that cats purr etc. (see also Armstrong 1997: 128). For further discussion of deflationism in connection with truth-making see McGrath 2003, Vision 2005 and Thomas 2011. Other philosophers appeal to the idea that when we say that a statement is true because a truth-maker for it exists, the “because” we employ is a connective (Künne 2003: 150–6; Hornsby 2005: 35–7; Melia 2005: 78–9; Schnieder 2006a: 29–37; Mulligan 2007). They think of this connective on the model of logical operators (“&”, “∼” etc.) i.e., expressions that link sentences but without expressing a relation that holds between the states of affairs, facts or tropes that these sentences denote; but unlike “&”, “∼” etc., “because” is not truth-functional. According to these philosophers, the truth-maker panegyrists have misconstrued the logical form of “makes true”. They have taken it to be a verb like “x hits y” when really it is akin to the connective “→” or “because” (Melia 2005: 78). There’s no need to introduce truth-makers as the special things that stand at one end of the truth-making relation with true statements at the other, no need to because it’s only superficial features of the grammar of our language that suggest there is a truth-making relation to stand at the ends of. Typically philosophers who maintain that “makes true” is a connective do not argue for this conclusion directly but encourage us to dwell upon the fact that it natural to hear the “because” that occurs in equivalent constructions as a connective. When we hear, e.g., “It is true that the rose is red because the rose is red” we don’t naturally hear it as expressing a binary relation between two things. So we shouldn’t hear, or at least don’t have to hear, “It’s true that the rose is red in virtue of the rose’s being red” or “the rose’s being red makes it true that the rose is red” as a expressing a binary relation between a truth and truth-maker either. Künne has gone further and suggested that the truth-making connective is really the “because” of conceptual explanation (2003: 154–5; see also Schnieder 2006a: 36–7). He encourages us to hear the equivalence between, and, He tells us that the “because” in (R*) is the “because” of “conceptual explanation”. Since (R) and (R*) are equivalent, he concludes that the “makes” construction in (R) is just a cumbersome way of expressing the “because” of conceptual explanation in (R*). Künne then invites us take the use of “makes” in (R) as a model for understanding the truth-making construction, This enables us to see that (S) does “not affirm a relation of any kind between a truth vehicle and something in the world” (Künne 2003: 155). Why? Because it is equivalent to, a claim that makes no (explicit) mention of facts. Moreover, the second clause of (S*), like the second clause of (R*), tells us when it is correct to affirm its first clause. In both cases we have an explanation that draws respectively upon our understanding of the concepts cousin and truth. Drawing upon these materials, we are then able to construct an explanation of the felt asymmetry whereby the truth of what we say about the world depends upon what the world is like, but not the other way around. What is written on the left-hand-side of (S*) is conceptually more sophisticated than what is written upon the right-hand-side because the former requires us to be able to grasp the concepts of statement and truth to understand it whereas the latter does not. Accordingly the latter requires less of both the world and us than the former to be both understood and true. That’s why it makes sense to deploy the right-hand-side (a claim about reality) to explain the left-hand-side (a claim about a truth bearer) but not the other way around (Hornsby 2005: 44; Dodd 2007: 399–400). It may still be that this is just wishful thinking, until it has been established that the “because” of truth making is a connective rather than a relational expression—i.e., not just because it would be technically convenient for us to believe it to be so or because it sounds like a connective to someone with the ears of a naive grammarian. As we saw in section 1.6, some advocates of truth-making as grounding also consider “because” to be a connective, although there is much disagreement about its implications. Some early exponents of the connective view of truth-making have embraced grounding (e.g. Schnieder), while others have not (e.g. Hornsby and Dodd). A final supporting suggestion: that the grand truth-maker projects of the late twentieth century arose (partly) out of a failure to appreciate the logical variety of natural language quantifiers that we unreflectively employ when expressing the intuitions that speak in favour of truth- makers. Consider how Armstrong expressed himself when he started out: It seems obvious that for every true contingent proposition there must be something in the world (in the largest sense of “something”) which makes the proposition true. For consider any true contingent proposition and imagine that it is false. We must automatically imagine some difference in the world. (Armstrong 1973: 11) Bigelow asks us to compare two worlds, one in which A is true, the other in which it is false. According to Bigelow, There must surely be some difference between these two possible worlds! They are clearly different in that A is true in one but not the other. So there must be something in one of these worlds which is lacking in the other and which accounts for the difference in truth. (1988: 126) Armstrong and Bigelow make the same assumption about the “some” they employ in their expression of what makes the difference between the world in which A is true and the world in which A is false; they assume it is an objectual quantifier in name position. With this assumption in place it is an easy move to make to think that there must be some thing that we quantify over that constitutes the difference between these circumstances, viz. the truth-maker for A. But as Williamson remarks “We should not assume that all quantification is either objectual or substitutional” (1999: 262–3; cf. Prior 1971: 31–4). Williamson argues that that the truth maker principle in fact involves irreducible non-substitutional quantification into sentence position… We should not even assume that all non-substitutional quantification is interpreted in terms of assignments of values to the variables. For “value” is a noun, not a sentence. (1999: 263) But suppose the “some” Armstrong and Bigelow employ is understood not as an objectual quantifier that comes equipped with a domain of entities over which it ranges but is understood in some other way. Then it would be open to us to acknowledge the force of Armstrong and Bigelow’s intuition that the circumstances in which A is true are somehow different from those in which it isn’t, but without our having to think that there exists something that we’ve quantified over than makes it so. Evidently it will not be until we have arrived at a settled view of the admissible interpretations our quantifiers may bear that this issue can be settled in a principled rather than dogmatic manner.