 Ockham led an unusually eventful life for a philosopher. As with so many medieval figures who were not prominent when they were born, we know next to nothing about the circumstances of Ockham’s birth and early years, and have to estimate dates by extrapolating from known dates of events later in his  life.[1] Ockham’s life may be divided into three main periods. Ockham was born, probably in late 1287 or early 1288, in the village of Ockham (= Oak Hamlet) in Surrey, a little to the southwest of  London.[2]  He probably learned basic Latin at a village school in Ockham or nearby, but this is not  certain.[3]  At an early age, somewhere between seven and thirteen, Ockham was “given” to the Franciscan order (the so called  “Greyfriars”).[4]  There was no Franciscan house (called a “convent”) in the tiny village of Ockham itself; the nearest one was in London, a day’s ride to the northeast. It was there that Ockham was sent. As an educational institution, even for higher education, London Greyfriars was a distinguished place; at the time, it was second only to the full-fledged Universities of Paris and Oxford. At Greyfriars, Ockham probably got most of his “grade school” education, and then went on to what we might think of as “high school” education in basic logic and “science” (natural philosophy), beginning around the age of fourteen. Around 1310, when he was about 23, Ockham began his theological training. It is not certain where this training occurred. It could well have been at the London Convent, or it could have been at Oxford, where there was another Franciscan convent associated with the university. In any event, Ockham was at Oxford studying theology by at least the year 1318–19, and probably the previous year as well, when (in 1317) he began a required two-year cycle of lectures commenting on Peter Lombard’s Sentences, the standard theological textbook of the day. Then, probably in 1321, Ockham returned to London Greyfriars, where he remained. Although he had taken the initial steps in the theology program at Oxford (hence his occasional nickname, the Venerabilis Inceptor, “Venerable Beginner”), Ockham did not complete the program there, and never became a fully qualified “master” of theology at Oxford. Nevertheless, London Greyfriars was an intellectually lively place, and Ockham was by no means isolated from the heat of academic controversy. Among his “housemates” were two other important Franciscan thinkers of the day, Walter Chatton and Adam Wodeham, both sharp critics of Ockham’s views. It was in this context that Ockham wrote many of his most important philosophical and theological works. In 1323 Ockham was called before the Franciscan province’s chapter meeting, held that year in Bristol, to defend his views, which were regarded with suspicion by some of his confreres. About the same time, someone—it is not clear who—went from England to the Papal court at Avignon and charged Ockham with teaching  heresy.[5]  As a result, a commission of theologians was set up to study the case. Ockham was called to Avignon in May, 1324, to answer the charges. He never went back to England. While in Avignon, Ockham stayed at the Franciscan convent there. It has sometimes been suggested that he was effectively under “house arrest,” but this seems an exaggeration. On the contrary, he appears to have been free to do more or less as he pleased, although of course he did have to be “on hand” in case the investigating commission wanted to question him about his writings. The investigation must not have demanded much of Ockham’s own time, since he was able to work on a number of other projects while he was in Avignon, including finishing his last major theological work, the Quodlibets. It should be pointed out that, although there were some stern pronouncements that came out of the investigation of Ockham, his views were never officially condemned as heretical. In 1327, Michael of Cesena, the Franciscan “Minister General” (the chief administrative officer of the order) likewise came to Avignon, in his case because of an emerging controversy between the Franciscans and the current Pope, John XXII, over the idea of “Apostolic poverty,” the view that Jesus and the Apostles owned no property at all of their own but, like the mendicant Franciscans, went around begging and living off the generosity of others. The Franciscans held this view, and maintained that their own practices were a special form of “imitation of Christ.” Pope John XXII rejected the doctrine, which is why Michael of Cesena was in Avignon. Things came to a real crisis in 1328, when Michael and the Pope had a serious confrontation over the matter. As a result, Michael asked Ockham to study the question from the point of view of previous papal statements and John’s own previous writings on the subject. When he did so, Ockham came to the conclusion, apparently somewhat to his own surprise, that John’s view was not only wrong but outright heretical. Furthermore, the heresy was not just an honest mistake; it was stubbornly heretical, a view John maintained even after he had been shown it was wrong. As a result, Ockham argued, Pope John was not just teaching heresy, but was a heretic himself in the strongest possible sense, and had therefore effectively abdicated his papacy. In short, Pope John XXII was no pope at all! Clearly, things had become intolerable for Ockham in Avignon. Under cover of darkness the night of May 26, 1328, Michael of Cesena, Ockham, and a few other sympathetic Franciscans fled Avignon and went into exile. They initially went to Italy, where Louis (Ludwig) of Bavaria, the Holy Roman Emperor, was in Pisa at the time, along with his court and retinue. The Holy Roman Emperor was engaged in a political dispute with the Papacy, and Ockham’s group found refuge under his protection. On June 6, 1328, Ockham was officially excommunicated for leaving Avignon without  permission.[6]  Around 1329, Louis returned to Munich, together with Michael, Ockham and the rest of their fugitive band. Ockham stayed there, or at any rate in areas under Imperial control, until his death. During this time, Ockham wrote exclusively on political  matters.[7]  He died on the night of April 9/10, 1347, at roughly the age of  sixty.[8]