 Ockham’s “physics” or natural philosophy is of a broadly Aristotelian sort, although he interprets Aristotle in his own fashion. Ockham wrote a great deal in this area; indeed his Exposition of Aristotle’s Physics is his longest work except for his Commentary on the  Sentences.[36] As a nominalist about universals, Ockham had to deal with the Aristotelian claim in the Posterior Analytics that science pertains to certain propositions about what is universal and necessary. He discusses this issue in the Prologue to his Exposition of the  Physics,[37]  and there agrees with Aristotle. But he interprets Aristotle’s dictum as saying that knowledge bears upon certain propositions with general (universal) terms in them; it is only in that sense that science deals with the universal. This of course does not mean that for Ockham our scientific knowledge can never get beyond the level of language to actual things. He distinguishes various senses of ‘to know’ (scire, from which we get scientia or “science”): As described  earlier,  Ockham holds that we do not need to allow special entities in all ten of Aristotle’s categories. In particular, we do not need them in the category of quantity. For Ockham, there is no need for real “mathematical” entities such as numbers, points, lines, and surfaces as distinct from individual substances and qualities. Apparent talk about such things can invariably be parsed away, via the theory of connotation or exposition, in favor of talk about substances and qualities (and, in certain theological contexts, a few relations). This Ockhamist move is illustrative of and influential on an important development in late medieval physics: the application of mathematics to non-mathematical things, culminating in Galileo’s famous statement that the “book of nature” is written in the “language of mathematics.” Such an application of mathematics violates a traditional Aristotelian prohibition against metabasis eis allo genos, grounded on quite reasonable considerations. The basic idea is that things cannot be legitimately compared in any respect in which they differ in species. Thus it makes little sense to ask whether the soprano’s high C is higher or lower than Mount Everest—much less to ask (quantitatively) how much higher or lower it is. But for Aristotle, straight lines and curved lines belong to different species of lines. Hence they cannot be meaningfully compared or measured against one another. The same holds for rectilinear motion and circular motion. Although the basic idea is reasonable enough, Ockham recognized that there are problems. The length of a coiled rope, for example, can straightforwardly be compared to the length of an uncoiled rope, and the one can meaningfully be said to be longer or shorter than, or equal in length to, the other. For that matter, a single rope surely stays the same length, whether it is coiled or extended full-length. Ockham’s solution to these problems is to note that, on his ontology, straight lines and curved lines are not really different species of lines—because lines are not extra things in the first place. Talk about lines is simply a “manner of speaking” about substances and qualities. Thus, to compare a “curved” (coiled) rope with a “straight” (uncoiled) one is not really to talk about the lengths of lines in two different species; it is to talk about two ropes. To describe the one as curved (coiled) and the other as straight (uncoiled) is not to appeal to specifically different kinds of entities—curvature and straightness—but merely to describe the ropes in ways that can be expounded according to two different patterns. Since such talk does not have ontological implications that require specifically different kinds of entities, the Aristotelian prohibition of metabasis does not apply. Once one realizes that we can appeal to connotation theory, and more generally the theory of exposition, without invoking new entities, the door is opened to applying mathematical analyses (all of which are exponible, for Ockham) to all kinds of things, and in particular to physical nature. Ockham’s contributions were by no means the only factor in the increasing mathematization of science in the fourteenth century. But they were important  ones.[38]