 Quine’s philosophical thought is remarkably consistent over the course of his long working life. There are developments, of course, but outright changes of mind are relatively rare and mostly on relatively minor points. We can, for the most part, treat him as having a single philosophical orientation, to which what he calls “naturalism” is fundamental. This is not to say that his naturalism is self-conscious and explicit from the start; it is, rather, something that he became clearer about over the years. (For the development of Quine’s naturalism, see Verhaegh, 2018.) The term “naturalism” has been understood in various ways; we need to see what Quine’s naturalism comes to. At one point, he describes naturalism as “the recognition that it is within science itself, and not in some prior philosophy, that reality is to be identified and described” (1981, 21). Two points are important to note about the idea of “science” here. First, it is less restrictive than it may seem. Quine certainly takes the natural sciences, especially physics, as paradigmatic. As he says himself, however, he uses the word “science” broadly; he explicitly includes psychology, economics, sociology, and history (see 1995, 49). Second, Quine does not see scientific knowledge as different in kind from our ordinary knowledge; he sees it, rather, as the result of attempts to improve our ordinary knowledge of the world: “Science is not a substitute for common sense but an extension of it.” (1957, 229). The scientist, he says, “is indistinguishable from the common man in his sense of evidence, except that the scientist is more careful.” (1957, 233). We might add that the scientist is more narrowly focused on issues of truth and objectivity and, in the hope of contributing to these goals, clearer and more systematic. Many philosophers would no doubt accept that the methods and techniques of science are the best way to find out about the world. (With or without the points just noted about the word “science”.) The distinctiveness of Quine’s naturalism begins to emerge if we ask what justifies this naturalistic claim: what reason do we have to believe that the methods and techniques of science are the best way to find out about the world? Quine would insist that this claim too must be based on natural science. (If this is circular, he simply accepts the circularity.) This is the revolutionary step: naturalism self-applied. There is no foundation for Quine’s naturalism: it is not based on anything else. The point here is that Quine denies that there is a distinctively philosophical standpoint, which might, for example, allow philosophical reflection to prescribe standards to science as a whole. He holds that all of our attempts at knowledge are subject to those standards of evidence and justification which are most explicitly displayed, and most successfully implemented, in the natural sciences. This applies to philosophy as well as to other branches of knowledge. The epistemologist, therefore, reflects on science from within science; there is no theory of knowledge distinct from science. “Epistemology”, Quine says, “…is contained in natural science, as a chapter of psychology” (1969, 83). (For an alternative view of the relation of philosophy to science, based on discussion of the history of science, see Friedman, 1997.) In Quine’s view, philosophers can, therefore, do no better than to adopt the standpoint of the best available knowledge, i.e. science, in some suitably broad sense. We adopt what he calls “the fundamental conceptual scheme of science and common sense” (1960, 276). Philosophers are thus to be constrained by scientific standards. In (1974) he puts it this way: “In our account of how science might be acquired we do not try to justify science by some prior and firmer philosophy, but neither are we to maintain less than scientific standards. Evidence must regularly be sought in external objects, out where observers can jointly observe it….” (1974, 34f.) The view sketched above has both positive and negative aspects. The latter are better-known, and Quine is often thought of as a negative philosopher, primarily concerned to criticize others. He casts doubt on terms which many philosophers take for granted. He does not dismiss such terms as meaningless, but simply as not meriting a place in serious science, or in the objective account of the world at which science aims. A well-known and important example is his criticism of the idea of meaning, in the sense of the meaning of a particular sentence or statement. Quine says: “Meaning… is a worthy object of philosophical and scientific clarification and analysis, and… it is ill-suited for use as an instrument of philosophical and scientific clarification and analysis.” (1981, 185). The term is insufficiently clear, and putative explanations which employ it are in fact unexplanatory; by engendering the illusion of explanation they tend to impede the progress of science. So philosophers should not rely on the term. He makes similar remarks about “thought”, “belief”, “experience”, “necessity”, and other terms which many philosophers assume are legitimate and available for philosophical use without themselves requiring explanation and justification in other terms. (For an illustration of Quine’s attitude towards the term “meaning” as used by one such philosopher, see his reply to Pagin in Orenstein and Kokato, 420f.) This criticism of the scientific and philosophical use of certain ordinary terms goes along with rejection of philosophical questions which make essential use of those terms. For example, many philosophers hold that there are important philosophical problems concerning knowledge: Do we really know anything at all? What exactly are the conditions on knowledge? (This latter question has seemed especially pressing since Gettier, 1963.) Quine, by contrast, finds the word “knowledge” vague, and consequently rejects it for serious use, saying that the word is ‘‘useful and unobjectionable in the vernacular where we acquiesce in vagueness, but unsuited to technical use because of lacking a precise boundary’’ (1984, 295). Accordingly, many such questions formulated using the term may simply be dismissed, even if it remains eminently useful for making rough sorts of claim, when we say as above that scientific knowledge is not different in kind from our ordinary knowledge. As we have just seen, Quine’s views issue in very general criticism of much philosophy and indeed of the assumption that the term “knowledge” marks a clear subject of inquiry. It is, nevertheless, a mistake to think of him as primarily a critical or negative thinker: his criticisms rely on his positive doctrine, which in turn generates further questions. As for whether those are genuinely philosophical questions, it is implicit in what has already been said that he would not acknowledge such a category as the ‘genuinely philosophical’ if that is meant to imply questions which are different in kind from those of science. But certainly he accepts that some questions are sufficiently general, abstract, and remote from observation, that they may be classified as philosophical. At times he assimilates the questions with which he is concerned to those which have traditionally occupied philosophers. Epistemology—the theory of knowledge—is a clear example, although Quine’s approach to that subject is quite different from that of many philosophers. In some places, Quine approaches epistemology through the problem of scepticism about the external world. But he has no room for the kind of scepticism which asks the following kind of question: even if our alleged knowledge, our science, is completely successful in its predictions, how do we know that it tells us the way the world really is? (See Alston, 1993.) Thus Quine says: This dismissal of one kind of scepticism is an example of Quine’s naturalism, and indicates how he understands that idea. There is, however, a way of understanding the sceptical question which Quine takes seriously. Philosophers have been concerned with the gap between what is given in experience and the knowledge that we take ourselves to have. Quine invokes gestalt psychology and argues that the simple sensory ideas which Berkeley and Hume had claimed were given by the senses are not in fact given, that we see things in three-dimensions, for example, instead of having to infer the third. He does not, however, conclude that there is no problem at all here. Rather, he says, “the problem was real but wrongly viewed” (1974, 2). Epistemology, as he sees it, is here “confronting a challenge to natural science that arises from within natural science.” (loc. cit.). What is the challenge? It starts with what Quine takes to be “a finding of natural science itself… that our information about the world comes only through impacts on our sensory receptors” (1990a, 19). The sceptical challenge is then: “How… could one hope to find out about that external world from such meager traces? In short, if our science were true, how could we know it?” (1974, 2). Scepticism, understood in this fashion, is a challenge to Quine’s form of naturalism. It questions whether our knowledge can be accounted for in terms which are, by Quine’s standards, purely naturalistic. Quine’s response is thus to sketch an austerely naturalistic account of how our knowledge, and the cognitive language in which that knowledge is embodied, arises, or might arise. This project, as he sees it, is essential to the defence of his naturalistic world-view. (Section 4. will go into more detail about the project.) When Quine asks: “How… could one hope to find out about that external world from such meager traces?” this is not a rhetorical question. It is, rather, a serious question, to be answered by deploying the full resources of our knowledge; it is a scientific question. Quine recognizes that the question, thus construed, is not exactly what earlier epistemologists had in mind, but argues that the change is justified: “A far cry, this, from the old epistemology. Yet it is no gratuitous change of subject matter, but an enlightened persistence rather in the original epistemological problem.” (1974, 3). The defence and articulation of Quine’s naturalism requires Quinean epistemology, an analogue of traditional epistemology but carried out as a scientific enterprise. It also requires that he set out, in outline, what is to be included in a naturalistic account of the world; in other words, it requires an account of the world, a least in broad outline. Among other things, this account constrains his epistemology, since that is to be a naturalistic account of knowledge. In what follows, we shall sometimes speak of Quine’s account of the world as his “metaphysics”, but it is metaphysics naturalized: it is not carried out a priori, or by reflection on the nature of Being quâ Being, or anything of that sort. (Quine himself does not much use the word “metaphysics”. He puts forward views on metaphysical topics—such as ontology, time, and abstract objects—but within the confines of his naturalism.) Quine approaches his naturalistic analogue of metaphysics through the idea of regimented theory. Regimented theory is our overall science, the sum total of our best and most objective knowledge about the world, reformulated in the clearest and simplest form. Quine sees this kind of reformulating as of a piece with ordinary scientific endeavours, but carried further than working scientists are likely to have reason to do. He discusses the distorting effect which language is likely to have on our view of the world and comments: Regimented theory is, of course, an idealization. It is not a complete and finished object, available for us to examine. Quine’s reflections on it might be considered as something like a thought-experiment: if we were to set about assembling our total theory of the world and recasting it in the best form, what would it look like? Since the enterprise is not in fact going to be carried out all the way we are not going to get a detailed answer. But on some important general issues, Quine holds, we can get answers. In particular, he argues that the framework of regimented theory is first-order logic with identity (and so that theory is extensional); that the variables of this theory range only over physical objects and sets; and that the predicates of the theory, the only non-logical vocabulary, are physicalistic, in his somewhat complicated sense. (See section 5, below.) Although this is not traditional a priori metaphysics, we should not underestimate the ambition of the project. He says of his regimented theory that “all traits of reality worthy of the name can be set down in an idiom of this austere form if in any idiom” (1960, 228) and speaks of “limning the true and ultimate structure of reality” (1960, 221). The claim that the variables of regimented theory range only over physical objects and sets is, as far as he is concerned, the claim that only physical objects and sets really exist.