 By “Metaphysical atomism” we will understand the view that the semantically simple symbols occurring in a proposition’s final analysis refer to simples. The Tractatus does not contain a distinct argument for this thesis, but, as we will see, one uncovers the needed argument in the course of scrutinizing the famous “Argument for Substance” of 2.0211–2: To see what precisely is being contended for in this argument one needs to appreciate the historical resonances of Wittgenstein’s invocation of the notion of “substance.” The Tractatus’s notion of substance is the modal analogue of Kant’s temporal notion. Whereas for Kant, substance is that which “persists” (in the sense of existing at all times), for Wittgenstein it is that which, figuratively speaking, “persists” through a “space” of possible worlds. Tractarian substance is the “unchanging” in the metaphorical sense of that which does not undergo existence change in the passage (also metaphorical) from world to world. Less figuratively, Tractarian substance is that which exists with respect to every possible world. For Kant, to assert that there is substance (in the schematized sense of the category) is to say that that there is some stuff such that every existence change (i.e., origination or annihilation) is necessarily an alteration or reconfiguration of that stuff. For Wittgenstein, analogously, to say that there is substance is to say that there are some things such that all “existence changes” in the metaphorical passage from world to world are reconfigurations of them. What undergo “existence changes” are atomic states of affairs (configurations of objects): a state of affairs exists with respect to one world but fails to exist with respect to another. Those things that remain in existence through these existence changes, and which are reconfigured in the process, are Tractarian objects. It follows that the objects that “constitute the substance of the world” (2.021) are necessary existents. The Tractatus , rather wonderfully, compresses this whole metaphorical comparison into a single remark: “The object is the fixed, the existing [das Bestehende]; the configuration is the changing [das Wechselnde].” (2.0271). “Wechsel,” it should be noted, is the word that Kant expressly reserves for the notion of existence change as opposed to alteration (Critique, A 187/B230). (Unfortunately, however, whether Wittgenstein had read the Critique in time for this circumstance to have influenced his own phrasing in the Tractatus is unknown.) Tractarian objects are what any “imagined”—or, more accurately, conceivable—world has in common with the real world (2.022). Accordingly, they constitute the world’s “fixed form” (2.022–3). ‘Fixed’ because, unlike the world’s content, objects (existentially speaking) hold fast in the transition from world to world. ‘Form’ because they constitute what is shared by all the worlds. (On Wittgenstein’s conception of possibility, the notion of an “alien” Tractarian object — one which is merely possible — is not even intelligible). If the objects make up the world’s form, what makes up its content? The answer, I think, is the various obtaining atomic states of affairs. Distinct worlds differ with respect to content because they differ with respect to which possible states of affairs obtain. Notably, possible atomic states of affairs also allow for a distinction between form and content. Their form is the manner of combination of their components, their content those components themselves (that is, their contained objects). If this is right, it follows that substance — the totality of objects — is indeed, as Wittgenstein says, “both form and content” (2.024–5). It is at once the form of the world and the content of possible states of affairs (These and further details of this interpretation of Wittgenstein’s conception of substance as the fixed or unchanging are provided in Proops 2004; see also Zalabardo 2015, Appendix II for more on simples, names, and necessary existents). As we have seen, the immediate goal of the argument for substance is to establish that there are things that exist necessarily. In the context of the assumption that anything complex could fail to exist through decomposition, this conclusion entails that there are simples (2.021). While the argument is presented as a two-stage modus tollens, it is conveniently reconstructed as a reductio ad absurdum (The following interpretation of the argument is a compressed version of that provided in Proops 2004. For two recent alternatives, see Zalabardo 2015, 243–254 and Morris 2017): Contradiction Our [5] is the main suppressed premise. It means, simply, that we can frame senseful propositions. Let us now consider how we might try to defend the inference from [2] to [3] on Wittgensteinian principles. As a preliminary, note that, given Wittgenstein’s equation in the Notes on Logic of having sense with having truth-poles (NB, 99), it seems reasonable to suppose that for a sentence to “have sense” with respect to a given world may be for it to have a truth value with respect to that world. Let us assume that this is so. Now suppose that everything exists contingently. Then, in particular, the referents of the semantically simple symbols occurring in a fully analysed sentence will exist contingently. But then any such sentence will contain a semantically simple symbol that fails to refer with respect to some possible world. Suppose, as a background assumption, that there are no contingent simples. (It will be argued below that this assumption plausibly follows from certain Tractarian commitments.) Then, if we assume that a sentence containing a semantically simple term is neither true nor false evaluated with respect to a world in which its purported referent fails to exist — and, for now, we do — then, for any such fully analysed sentence, there will be some world such that the sentence depends for its truth valuedness with respect to that world on the truth with respect to that world of some other sentence, viz., the sentence stating that the constituents of the relevant complex are configured in a manner necessary and sufficient for its existence. It follows that if everything exists contingently, then whether a sentence is senseful with respect to a world will depend on whether another sentence is true with respect to that world. The step from [3] to [4] runs as follows. Suppose that whether any sentence “has sense” (i.e., on our reading, has a truth-value) depends (in the way just explained) on whether another is true. Then every sentence will have an “indeterminate sense” in the sense that it will lack a truth value with respect to at least one possible world. But an indeterminate sense is no sense at all, for a proposition by its very nature “reaches through the whole logical space” (3.42) (i.e., it is truth-valued with respect to every possible  world).[6]  So if every sentence depended for its “sense” (i.e., truth-valuedness) on the truth of another, no sentence would have a determinate sense, and so no sentence would have a sense. In which case we would be unable to frame senseful propositions (i.e., to “draw up pictures of the world true or false”). One apparent difficulty concerns the assumption that to have sense is just to be true or false. How can such a view be attributed to the Wittgenstein of the Tractatus given his view that tautology, which is true, and contradiction, which is false, are without sense (sinnlos) (4.461)? The seeds of an answer may be contained in a remark from Wittgenstein’s lectures at Cambridge during the year 1934–1935. Looking back on what he’d written in the Tractatus, he says: It is possible, then, that Wittgenstein is thinking of a sinnlos proposition as a proposition that “has sense” but has it to a zero degree. According to this conception, a tautology, being true, is, in contrast to a nonsensical string, in the running for possessing a non-zero quantity of sense, but is so constructed that, in the end, it doesn’t get to have one. And, importantly, in virtue of being in the running for having a non-zero quantity of sense its possession of a zero quantity amounts to its, broadly speaking, ‘having sense’. Such a view, according to which, for some non-count noun N, an N-less entity has N, but has a zero quantity of it, is not without precedent in the tradition. Kant, for example, regards rest (motionlessness) as a species of motion: a zero quantity of it (Bader, Other Internet Resources, 22–23). If Sinnlosigkeit is, similarly, a species of Sinn, the equation of having Sinn with being true or false will be preserved. To offer a full defence of this understanding of Sinnlosigkeit would take us too far afield, but I mention it to show that the current objection is not decisive. Another apparent difficulty for this reconstruction arises from its appearing to contradict Tractatus 3.24, which clearly suggests that if the complex entity A were not to exist, the proposition “F[A]” would be false, rather than, as the argument requires, without truth value. But the difficulty is only apparent. It merely shows that 3.24 belongs to a theory that assumes that the world does have substance. On this assumption Wittgenstein can say that whenever an apparent name occurs that appears to mention a complex this is only because it is not, after all, a genuine name — and this is what he does say. But on the assumption that the world has no substance, so that everything is complex, Wittgenstein can no longer say this. For now he must allow that the semantically simple symbols occurring in a proposition’s final analysis do refer to complexes. So in the context of the assumption that every proposition has a final analysis, the reductio assumption of the argument for substance entails the falsity of 3.24. But since 3.24 is assumed to be false only in the context of a reductio, it is something that Wittgenstein can consistently endorse (This solution to the apparent difficulty for the present reconstruction is owed, in its essentials, to David Pears (see Pears 1987, 78). To complete the argument it only remains to show that Tractarian commitments extrinsic to the argument for substance rule out contingent  simples.[7]  Suppose a is a contingent simple. Then “a exists” must be a contingent proposition. But it cannot be an elementary proposition because it will be entailed by any elementary proposition containing ‘a,’ and elementary propositions are logically independent (4.211). So “a exists” must be non-elementary, and so further analyzable. And yet there would seem to be no satisfactory analysis of this proposition on the assumption that ‘a’ names a contingent simple — no analysis, that is to say, that is both intrinsically plausible and compatible with Tractarian principles. Wittgenstein cannot analyse “a exists” as the proposition “∃x(x = a)” for two reasons. First, he would reject this analysis on the grounds that it makes an ineliminable use of the identity sign (5.534). Second, given his analysis of existential quantifications as disjunctions, the proposition “∃x(x = a)” would be further analysed as the non-contingent proposition “a = a ∨ a = b ∨ a = c…”. Nor can he analyse “a exists” as “~[ ~Fa & ~Ga & ~Ha…]” — that is, as the negation of the conjunction of the negations of every elementary proposition involving “a.” To suppose that it could, is to suppose that the proposition “~Fa & ~Ga & ~Ha…” means “a does not exist,” and yet by the lights of the Tractatus this proposition would show a’s existence — or, more correctly, it would show something that one tries to put into words by saying “a exists” (cf. 5.535, Corr, 126)). So, pending an unforeseen satisfactory analysis of “a exists,” this proposition will have to be analysed as a complex of propositions not involving a. In other words, ‘a’ will have to be treated as an incomplete symbol and the fact of a’s existence will have to be taken to consist in the fact that objects other than a stand configured thus and so. But that would seem to entail that a is not simple. The argument for substance may be criticized on several grounds. First, the step leading from [2] to [3] relies on the assumption that a name fails to refer with respect to a possible world at which its actual-world referent does not exist. This amounts to the controversial assumption that names do not function as what Nathan Salmon has called “obstinately rigid designators” (Salmon 1981, 34). Secondly, the step leading from [3] to [4] relies on the assumption that a sentence that is neither true nor false with respect to some possible world fails to express a sense. As Wittgenstein was later to realize, the case of intuitively senseful, yet vague sentences plausibly constitutes a counterexample (cf. PI Section 99). Lastly, one may question the assumption that it makes sense to speak of a final analysis, given that the procedure for analysing a sentence of ordinary language has not been made clear (See PI, Sections 60, 63–4, and Section 91).