 By “Linguistic atomism” we shall understand the view that the analysis of every proposition terminates in a proposition all of whose genuine components are names. It is a striking fact that the Tractatus contains no explicit argument for linguistic atomism. This fact has led some commentators — e.g., Peter Simons (1992) — to suppose that Wittgenstein’s position here is motivated less by argument than by brute intuition. And indeed, Wittgenstein does present some conclusions in this vicinity as if they required no argument. At 4.221, for example, he says: “It is obvious that in the analysis of propositions we must come to elementary propositions, which consist of names in immediate combination” (emphasis added). Nonetheless, some basic observations about the Tractatus’s conception of analysis will enable us to see why Wittgenstein should have thought it obvious that analysis must terminate in this way. A remark from the Philosophical Grammar, written in 1936, throws light on how Wittgenstein had earlier conceived of the process of analysis: One of the distinctive features of Russell’s definition is that it treats the expression “the x such that Fx” as an “incomplete symbol.” Such symbols have no meaning in isolation but are given meaning by contextual definitions that treat of the sentential contexts in which they occur (cf. PM, 66). Incomplete symbols do, of course, have meaning because they make a contribution to the meanings of the sentences in which they occur (cf. Principles, Introduction, x). What is special about them is that they make this contribution without expressing a propositional constituent. (On the nature of incomplete symbols, see Pickel 2013) Russell’s definition is contained in the following clauses (For the sake of expository transparency, his scope-indicating devices are omitted.). [1] G(the x: Fx) = ∃x(∀y(Fy↔y=x) & Gx)    Df.  (cf. Russell 1905b; Russell 1990, 173) [2] (the x: Fx) exists = ∃x∀y(Fy↔y=x)    Df.  (cf. Russell 1990, 174) The fact that existence is dealt with by a separate definition shows that Russell means to treat the predicate ‘exists’ as itself an incomplete symbol, to be eliminated in favour of the existential quantifier. One can understand why Wittgenstein discerned an affinity between the theory of descriptions and his own envisioned “calculus,” for one can extract from his remarks in the Tractatus and elsewhere two somewhat parallel proposals for eliminating what he calls terms for “complexes”: Clauses [1] to [4] share the feature that any sentence involving apparent reference to an individual is treated as false rather than as neither true nor false if that individual should be discovered not to exist. Wittgenstein’s first contextual definition — our [3] — occurs in a Notebooks entry from 1914 (NB, 4), but it is also alluded to in the Tractatus: In [3] the statement “about [the complex’s] constituent parts” is “Fa & Fb,” while the proposition which “completely describes” the complex is “aRb.” If the propositions obtained by applying [3] and [4] are to be further analysed, a two-stage procedure will be necessary: first, the apparent names generated by the analysis — in the present case ‘a’ and ‘b’ — will need to be  replaced[3]  with symbols that are overtly terms for complexes, e.g., ‘[cSd]’ and ‘[eFg];’ second, the contextual definitions [3] and [4] will need to be applied again to eliminate these terms. If there is going to be a unique final analysis, each apparent name will have to be uniquely paired with a term for a complex. So the program of analysis at which Wittgenstein gestures, in addition to committing him to something analogous to Russell’s theory of descriptions, also commits him to the analogue of Russell’s “description theory of ordinary names” (cf. Russell 1905a). This is the idea that every apparent name not occurring at the end of analysis is equivalent in meaning to some definite description. Wittgenstein’s first definition, like Russell’s, strictly speaking, stands in need of a device for indicating scope, for otherwise it would be unclear how to apply the analysis when we choose, say, “~G” as our instance of “F.” In such a case the question would arise whether the resulting instance of [3] is [5]: “~G[aRb] = ~Ga & ~Gb & aRb,” which corresponds to giving the term for a complex wide scope with respect to the negation operator, or whether it is: [6] “~G[aRb] = ~[Ga & Gb & aRb],” which corresponds to giving the term for a complex narrow scope. One suspects that Wittgenstein’s intention would most likely have been to follow Russell’s convention of reading the logical operator as having narrow scope unless the alternative is expressly indicated (cf. PM, 172). Definition [3] has obvious flaws. While it may work for such predicates as “x is located in England,” it obviously fails for certain others, e.g., “x is greater than three feet long” and “x weighs exactly four pounds.” This problem can hardly have escaped Wittgenstein; so it seems likely that he would have regarded his proposals merely as tentative illustrations, open to supplementation and refinement. Although Wittgenstein’s second contextual definition — our [4] — does not occur in the Tractatus, it is implied by a remark from the Notes on Logic that seems to anticipate 2.0201: Since the proposition that “describes the complex,” [aRb], “perfectly” is just the proposition that aRb, Wittgenstein’s clarifying addendum amounts to the claim that the proposition “aRb” is equivalent to the proposition “[aRb] exists.” And this equivalence is just our [4]. It turns out, then, that existence is defined only in contexts in which it is predicated of complexes. Wittgenstein proposal thus mirrors Russell’s in embodying the idea that it makes no sense to speak of the existence of immediately given (that is, named) simples (cf. PM, 174–5). This is why Wittgenstein was later to refer to his “objects” as “that for which there is neither existence nor non-existence” (PR, 72). His view seems to be that when ‘a’ is a Tractarian name, what we try to say by uttering the nonsense string “a exists” will, strictly speaking, be shown by the fact that the final analysis of some proposition contains ‘a’ (cf. 5.535). But of course, the Tractatus does not always speak strictly. Indeed, what is generally taken to be the ultimate conclusion of the Tractatus’s so-called “Argument for Substance” (2.021–2.0211) itself tries to say something that can only be shown, since it asserts the existence of objects. The sharpness of the tension here is only partly disguised by the oblique manner in which the conclusion is formulated. Instead of arguing for the existence of objects, the Tractatus argues for the thesis that the world “has substance.” However, because “objects constitute the substance of the world” (2.021), and because substance is that which exists independently of what is the case (2.024), this is tantamount to saying that objects exist. So it seems that Wittgenstein’s argument for substance must be regarded as a part of the ladder we are supposed to throw away (6.54). But having acknowledged this point, we shall set it aside as peripheral to our main concerns. The most obvious similarity between the two sets of definitions is that each seeks to provide for the elimination of what purport to be semantically complex referring expressions. The most obvious difference consists in the fact that Wittgenstein’s definitions are designed to eliminate not definite descriptions, but rather terms for complexes, for example the expression “[aRb],” which, judging by remarks in the Notebooks, is to be read: “a in the relation R to b” (NB, 48) (This gloss seems to derive from Russell’s manner of speaking of complexes in Principia Mathematica, where examples of terms for complexes include, in addition to “a in the relation R to b,” “a having the quality q”, and “a and b and c standing in the relation S” (PM, 44).). One might wonder why there should be this difference at all. Why not treat the peculiar locution “a in the relation R to b” as a definite description — as say, “the complex consisting of a and b, combined so that aRb”? This description could then be eliminated by applying the Tractatus’s own variant upon the theory of descriptions: Here the distinctness of the variables (the fact that they are distinct) replaces the sign for distinctness “≠” (cf. 5.53). Since Wittgenstein did not adopt this expedient, it seems likely that he would have regarded the predicate “x is a complex consisting of a and b, combined so that aRb” as meaningless in virtue of — among other things — its containing ineliminable occurrences of the pseudo-concepts “complex,” “combination,” and “constitution.” Only the first of these notions figures on his list of pseudo-concepts in the Tractatus (4.1272), but there is no indication that that list is supposed to be exhaustive. There is a further respect in which Wittgenstein’s analytical proposals differ from Russell’s. Russell’s second definition — our [2] — has the effect of shifting the burden of indicating ontological commitment from the word ‘exists’ to the existential quantifier. In Wittgenstein’s definition, by contrast, no single item of vocabulary takes over the role of indicating ontological commitment. That commitment is indicated only after the final application of the definition, by the meaningfulness of the names in the fully analysed proposition — or, more precisely, by the fact that certain symbols are names (cf. 5.535). The somewhat paradoxical consequence is that one can assert a statement of the form “[aRb] exists” without thereby manifesting any ontological commitment to the complex [aRb] (cf. EPB, 121). What this shows is that the two theories relieve the assertor of ontological commitments of quite different kinds. In Russell’s case, the analysis — our [2] — removes a commitment to an apparent propositional constituent — a “denoting concept”  [5]  —expressed by the phrase ‘the F,’ but it does not remove the commitment to the F itself. For Wittgenstein, by contrast, the analysis shows that the assertor never was ontologically committed to the complex [aRb] by an utterance of “[aRb] exists.” Russell’s conception of analysis at the time of the theory of descriptions — c.a. 1905 — is relatively clear: Analysis involves pairing up one sentence with another that expresses, more perspicuously, the very same Russellian proposition. The analysans counts as more perspicuous than the analysandum because the former is free of some of the latter’s merely apparent ontological commitments. By the time of Principia Mathematica, however, this relatively transparent conception of analysis is no longer available. Having purged his ontology of propositions in 1910, Russell can no longer appeal to the idea that analysans and analysandum express one and the same proposition. He now adopts “the multiple relation theory of judgment,” according to which the judgment (say) that Othello loves Desdemona, instead of being, as Russell had formerly supposed, a dyadic relation between the judging mind and the proposition Othello loves Desdemona, is now taken to be a non-dyadic, or, in Russell’s terminology, “multiple,” relation whose terms are the judging mind and those items that were formerly regarded as constituents of the proposition Othello loves Desdemona (Russell 1994, 155). After 1910 Russell can say that a speaker who sincerely assertively uttered the analysans (in a given context) would be guaranteed to make the same judgment as one who sincerely assertively uttered the analysandum (in the same context), but he can no longer explain this accomplishment by saying that the two sentences express the same proposition. A further departure from the earlier, relatively transparent conception of analysis is occasioned by Russell’s resolution of the set-theoretic version of his paradox. His solution involves giving an analysis of a sentence whose utterance could not be taken to express any judgment. One argues that the sentence “{x: φx} ε {x: φx}” is nonsense because the contextual definitions providing for the elimination of class terms yield for this case a sentence that is itself nonsense by the lights of the theory of types (PM, 76). It’s (apparent) negation is, accordingly, also nonsense. In Principia, then, there is no very clear model of what is preserved in analysis. The best we can say is that Russell’s contextual definitions have the feature that a (sincere, assertive) utterance of the analysans is guaranteed to express the same judgment as the analysandum, if the latter expresses a judgment at all. Some of the unclarity in the conception of analysis introduced by Russell’s rejection of propositions is inherited by Wittgenstein, who similarly rejects any ontology of shadowy entities expressed by sentences. In the Tractatus a “proposition” (Satz) is a “propositional sign in its projective relation to the world” (3.12). This makes it seem as though any difference between propositional signs should suffice for a difference between propositions, in which case analysans and analysandum could at best be distinct propositions with the same truth conditions. Enough has now been said to make possible a consideration of Wittgenstein’s reasons for describing the position I have been calling “linguistic atomism” as “obvious.” Since the model for Tractarian analysis is the replacement of apparent names with (apparently) co-referring “terms for complexes,” together with eliminative paraphrase of the latter, it follows trivially that the endpoint of analysis, if there is one, will contain neither “terms for complexes” nor expressions that can be replaced by terms for complexes. Wittgenstein, moreover, thinks it obvious that this analysis of every proposition does terminate. The reason he supposes analysis cannot go on forever is that he conceives an unanalyzed proposition as deriving its sense from its analysis. As Tractatus 3.261 puts it: “Every defined sign signifies via those signs by which it is defined” (Cf. NB, 46; PT 3.20102). It follows that no proposition can have an infinite analysis, on pain of never acquiring a sense. So analysis must terminate in propositions devoid of incomplete symbols. That much, at least, is plausibly obvious, but unfortunately it does not follow that the final analysis of language will be wholly devoid of complex symbols. The trouble is that for all we have said so far, a fully analysed proposition might yet contain one or more complex symbols that have meaning in their own right. Clearly, then, Wittgenstein was assuming that all genuine referring expressions must be semantically simple: they must lack anything like a Fregean sense. But why should that be so? The seeds of one answer are contained in Tractatus 3.3, the proposition in which Wittgenstein enunciates his own version of Frege’s context principle: “Only the proposition has sense; only in the context of a proposition has a name meaning” (3.3). Wittgenstein’s juxtaposition of these two claims suggests that the context principle is supposed to be his ground for rejecting senses for sub-sentential expressions. But just how it could provide such a ground is far from clear. Another, more concrete, possibility is that Wittgenstein simply accepted the arguments Russell had given in “On Denoting” for rejecting senses for sub-sentential expressions.