 Wittgenstein’s turn away from logical atomism may be divided into two main phases. During the first phase (1928–9), documented in his 1929 article “Some Remarks on Logical Form” (Klagge and Nordmann, 1993, 29–35), Wittgenstein exhibits a growing dissatisfaction with certain central details of the Tractatus’s logical atomism, and notably with the thesis of the independence of elementary propositions. During this phase, however, he is still working within the broad conception of analysis presupposed, if not fully developed, in the Tractatus. The second phase (1931–2) involves a revolutionary break with that very conception. The so-called “colour-exclusion problem” is a difficulty that arises for the Tractatus’s view that it is metaphysically possible for each elementary proposition to be true or false regardless of the truth or falsity of the others (4.211). In view of its generality, the problem might more accurately be termed “the problem of the manifest incompatibility of apparently unanalysable statements.” The problem may be stated as follows: Suppose that a is a point in the visual field. Consider the propositions P: “a is blue at t” and Q: “a is red at t” (supposing “red” and “blue” to refer to determinate shades). It is clear that P and Q cannot both be true; and yet, on the face of it, it seems that this incompatibility (or “exclusion” in Wittgenstein’s parlance) is not a logical impossibility. In the Tractatus Wittgenstein’s response was to treat the problem as merely apparent. He supposed that in such cases further analysis would succeed in revealing the incompatibility to be logical in nature: As F. P. Ramsey observes in his review of the Tractatus (Ramsey, 1923), the analysis described here actually fails to reveal a logical incompatibility between the two statements in question; for, even granting the correctness of the envisaged reduction of the phenomenology of colour perception to facts about the velocities of particles, the fact that one and the same particle cannot be (wholly) in two places at the same time still looks very much like a synthetic a priori truth. It turns out, however, that Wittgenstein was well aware of this point. He knew that he had not taken the analysis far enough to bring out a logical contradiction, but he was confident that he had taken a step in the right direction. In a Notebooks entry from August 1916 he remarks that: “The fact that a particle cannot be in two places at the same time does look more like a logical impossibility [than the fact that a point cannot be red and green at the same time]. If we ask why, for example, then straight away comes the thought: Well, we should call particles that were in two places [at the same time] different, and this in its turn all seems to follow from the structure of space and particles” (NB, 81; emphasis added). Here Wittgenstein is conjecturing that it will turn out to be a conceptual (hence, for him logical) truth about particles and space (and presumably also time) that particles in two distinct places (at the same time) are distinct. He does not yet possess the requisite analyses to demonstrate this conjecture, but he is optimistic that they will be found. The article “Some Remarks on Logical Form” (1929) marks the end of this optimism. Wittgenstein now arrives at the view that some incompatibilities cannot, after all, be reduced to logical impossibilities. His change of heart appears to have been occasioned by a consideration of incompatibilities involving the attribution of qualities that admit of gradation — e.g., the pitch of a tone, the brightness of a shade of colour, etc. Consider, for example, the statements: “A has exactly one degree of brightness” and “A has exactly two degrees of brightness.” The challenge is to provide analyses of these statements that bring out the logical impossibility of their being true together. What Wittgenstein takes to be the most plausible suggestion — or at least a sympathetic reconstruction of it — adapts the standard definitions of the numerically definite quantifiers to the system described in the Tractatus, analysing these claims as respectively: “∃x(Bx & A has x) & ~∃x,y(Bx & By & A has x and A has y)” (“Bx” means “x is a degree of brightness”) and “∃x,y(Bx & By & A has x and A has y) & ~∃x,y,z(Bx & By & Bz & A has x & A has y & A has z).” But the suggestion will not do. The trouble is that the analysis — absurdly — makes it seem as though when something has just one degree of brightness there could be a substantive question about which (if any) of the three mentioned in the analysis of the second claim— x or y or z — it was—as if a degree of brightness were a kind of corpuscle whose association with a thing made it bright (cf. Klagge and Nordmann, 33). Wittgenstein concludes that the independence of elementary propositions must be abandoned and that terms for real numbers must enter into atomic propositions, so that the impossibility of something’s having both exactly one and exactly two degrees of brightness emerges as an irreducibly mathematical impossibility. This, in turn, contradicts the Tractatus’s idea that all necessity is logical necessity (6.37). Wittgenstein differs from Frege and Russell in denying that the symbols for generality have meaning in isolation. Instead, the Tractatus treats them as incomplete symbols to be analysed away according to the following schemata: Universal (existential) quantification is treated as equivalent to a possibly infinite conjunction (disjunction) of propositions. Wittgenstein’s dissatisfaction with this view is expressed most clearly in G. E. Moore’s notes of Wittgenstein’s lectures from Michaelmas term 1932. (∃x).fx = [logical] sum, fa ∨ fb ∨ fc… This is wrong, but not as absurd as it looks. (entry for 25 November, 1932, Stern et. al., 2016,  215)[10]. Explaining why the Tractatus’s analysis of generality is not palpably absurd, Wittgenstein says: Clearly, in the Tractatus Wittgenstein was not making the simple-minded mistake of forgetting that “Every F is G” cannot be analysed as “Ga & Gb & Gc…” even when a, b, c, etc. are in fact the only Fs. (Unfortunately, his claim that he registered this point in the Tractatus is not borne out by the text). His idea was rather that the Tractatus’s analysis of generality is offered only for the special case in which a, b, c, etc, are “individuals” in Russell’s sense. Wittgenstein had supposed that in this case there is no proposition to express the supplementary clause that is needed in the other cases. Unfortunately, Wittgenstein does not explain why there should be no such proposition, but the answer seems likely to be the following: What we are assumed to be analysing is actually “Everything is G.” In this case any allegedly necessary competing clause — for example, “a, b, c etc., are the only things” (that is, Tractarian objects) — would just be a nonsense-string produced in the misfired attempt to put into words something that is shown by the fact that when analysis bottoms out it yields as names only such as figure in the conjunction “Ga & Gb & Gc…” (cf. Tractatus 4.1272). What led Wittgenstein to abandon the Tractatus’s analysis of generality was his realization that he had failed adequately to think through the infinite case. He had proceeded as though the finite case could be used as a way of thinking about the infinite case, the details of which could be sorted out at a later date. By 1932 he had come to regard this attitude as mistaken. The point is made in a passage from the Cambridge Lectures whose meaning can only be appreciated after some preliminary explanation. The passage in question makes a crucial claim about something Wittgenstein refers to as “The Proposition”. By this phrase in this context he means the joint denial of all the propositions that are values of the propositional function “x is in this room”. This proposition can be written: His point is that the Proposition does not, despite appearances, express a logical product. It rather, he now seems to be saying, expresses something like an indefinitely extensible process. Wittgenstein came to see his earlier hope that it did express a logical product rested on the mistake of confusing “dots of infinitude” with “dots of laziness.”. The upshot could scarely be more important: if Wittgenstein is right, the Tractatus’s very conception of the general form of the proposition, because it makes essential appeal to the idea of the joint denial of arbitrarily many values of a propositional function, is itself infected with confusion. Wittgenstein, however, does not think that the confusion of kinds of dots was the deepest mistake he made in the Tractatus. Beyond this: “There was a deeper mistake — confusing logical analysis with chemical analysis. I thought ‘(∃x)fx’ is a definite logical sum, only I can’t at the moment tell you which” (November 25, 1932, ibid.; cf. PG, 210). Wittgenstein had supposed that there was a fact of the matter — unknown, but in principle knowable — about which logical sum “(∃x).fx” is equivalent to. But because he had failed to specify the analytical procedure in full detail, and because he had not adequately explained what analysis is supposed to preserve, this idea was unwarranted. Indeed, it exemplified an attitude he was later to characterize as amounting to a kind of unacceptable “dogmatism” (WWK, 182).